<div><h1 class='nobreak'>CHAPTER I</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>The voice of her new friend, bidding her good night,
followed Miss Hannah Mole as she went down the garden
path, and the laurel bushes, as she brushed by them,
repeated in a whisper, yet with a strange assurance, the
persuasive invitation of Mrs. Gibson to come back soon.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, yes, I’ll come!’ Hannah called out hurriedly and
she glanced over her shoulder as the golden patch on the
path disappeared. Mrs. Gibson had shut the front door:
she had returned to the problems which ought never to
have arisen in her respectable house, and Hannah, freed
from the necessity for action, for the expression of
sympathy and the giving of advice, was able to admire
the skill she had shown in these activities, but first,
because she was grateful by nature as well as appreciative
of herself, she offered up thanks for the timely justification
of her faith in the interest of life. That faith had been
persistent though, latterly, it had demanded a dogged
perseverance, and at the moment when she most needed
encouragement it had been supplied. She would not
ignore the creditable quickness with which she had
grasped the opportunity offered; it was, indeed, only to
those with seeing eyes and hearing ears that miracles were
vouchsafed, and who but Hannah Mole, at her impact
with Mrs. Gibson’s broad bosom, would have had the
prescience to linger after her apology and give Mrs.
Gibson time to recover her breath and explain why she
stood outside her gate, bare-headed and in a flutter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>On the same spot Hannah now stood, a little breathless
herself, through excitement and the effort to reconcile
her good fortune with the small deception she had
practised on her employer. The effort was not successful
and she renewed her conviction that the power which
controlled her life was not hampered by man’s
conventional morality, otherwise, she would surely have
been punished and not rewarded for the lie which had
induced Mrs. Widdows to send her companion shopping
at the hour when she should have been mending Mrs.
Widdows’ second best black dress. Yes, Hannah should
have been knocked down by a motor car or, worse still,
have been robbed of her purse, for hiding the reel of
silk and pretending she could not find it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The crowded little sitting-room had been unbearably
hot. A large fire blazed and crackled, the canary made
sad, subdued movements in its cage, Mrs. Widdows’
corsets creaked regularly, her large knees almost touched
Hannah’s own, for the two women sat near each other
to share the lamplight, and Hannah, luckier than the
canary, had found a means of escape. Too wise to suggest
that she should go out and buy the necessary silk, she had
merely remarked with regret that it would be impossible
for Mrs. Widdows to wear the second best dress on the
morrow, and, at once, Mrs. Widdows had indignantly
driven her forth with orders to return quickly. And nearly
two hours had passed and the silk was still in the shop.
Hannah was indifferent about the silk, for the reel she
had removed from the work-basket was in the pocket of
her coat, and she was twopence halfpenny and an
adventure to the good, but the passage of time was a
serious matter, so serious that another hour or two would
make no difference. She glanced up the street, and then
down, and while she seemed to hesitate between duty and
desire, she had already made her choice. She would go
down, towards the traffic and the shops. By the light
of the street lamp, she looked at the old-fashioned flat
watch she carried in her handbag. It was six o’clock.
Most of the shops would be shut, but there would be
light and movement; tramcars full of passengers would
be leaping in their advance, like strange beasts rejoicing
in their strength; people on foot would be streaming
homewards from the city of Radstowe, and Miss Hannah
Mole, who had no home of her own, would look at these
people with envy but with the cynical reflection that some
of those homes might be comparable to that of Mrs.
Widdows—stuffy and unkind, or to the one she had just
left—holding tragedy maliciously streaked with humour.
In nearly twenty years of earning her living, as companion,
nursery governess or useful help, she had lost all illusions
except those she created for herself, but these appeared
at her command and, stirred by her late adventure, she
was ready to find another in the approach of each person
she met. In Prince’s Road, however, there were not many
people and such as there were walked quietly, as though
the influence of the old terraced houses on one side of
the road were stronger than that of the later buildings
on the other. It was the old houses that gave its character
to the street and here, as elsewhere in Upper Radstowe,
the gently persistent personality of the place remained,
unmoved by any material or spiritual changes since the
first red bricks were well and truly laid. It was like a
masterpiece of portrait painting in which a person of
another generation looks down on his descendants and
dominates them through the union of the painter’s art and
something permanent in himself. Even where the old
houses had disappeared, their ghosts seemed to hover
over the streets and Hannah, too, walked quietly, careful
not to disturb them. In no other place of her acquaintance
did the trees cast such lovely shadows in the lamplight,
and on this windless night the leaves were patterned
with extraordinary, ethereal clearness on the pavement.
Now and then she paused to look at them, puzzled that
the reflected object should always seem more beautiful
than the original, and eager to find some analogy to this
experience in her mental processes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not the thing itself, but its shadow,’ she murmured,
as she saw her own shadow going before her, and she
nodded as though she had solved a problem. She judged
herself by the shadow she chose to project for her own
pleasure and it was her business in life—and one in
which she usually failed—to make other people accept
her creation. Yes, she failed, she failed! They would
not look at the beautiful, the valuable Hannah Mole:
they saw the substance and disapproved of it and she did
not blame them: it was what she would have done herself
and in the one case when she had concentrated on the
fine shadow presented to her, she had been mistaken.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She pushed past that thought with an increase of her
pace and reached the wide thoroughfare where the
tramcars clanged and swayed. Here she paused and looked
about her. This part of Radstowe was a new growth, it
was not the one of her affections, but on this autumn
evening it had its beauty. The broad space made by the
meeting of several roads was roughly framed in trees, for
in Radstowe trees grew everywhere, as church spires
seemed to spring up at every corner, and the electric
light from tall standards cast a theatrical glare on the
greens and browns and yellows of their leaves.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At Hannah’s left hand, in a shrubbery of its own,
there stood a building, in a debased Greek style, whither
the Muses occasionally drew the people of Radstowe to
a half-hearted worship. The darkness in which it was
retired, suddenly illuminated by the head-lights of a
passing car, dealt kindly with its faults, and there was
mystery in its pale, pillared façade, a suggestion of sensitive
aloofness in its withdrawal from the road. When
Hannah passed this temple in the daytime, her long nose
would twitch in derision at its false severity and the
rusty-looking shrubs dedicated to its importance in the
æsthetic life of Radstowe—had the gardener, she wondered,
chosen laurels with any thought beyond their
sturdiness?—but now it had an artificial charm for her:
she could ignore the placards on the enclosing railings
and see it as another example of the city’s facility for
happily mixing the incongruous.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She stood on the pavement, a thin, shabby figure, so
insignificant in her old hat and coat, so forgetful of herself
in her enjoyment of the scene, that she might have
been wearing a cloak of invisibility, and while she watched
the traffic and saw the moving tramcars like magic
lantern slides, quick and coloured, no one who saw through
that cloak would have suspected her power for transmuting
what was common into what was rare and, in
that occupation, keeping anxious thoughts at bay. To-night
she could not keep them all at bay for though she
was pleased with her adventure and the speculations in
which it permitted her to indulge, she was altruistically
concerned for the other actors in it, and it would have
obvious consequences for herself. Mrs. Widdows was
not a lady to whom confidences could be made or who
would accept excuses, and Hannah would presently find
herself without a situation. It was a familiar experience
but, in this case, her contempt would have to be assumed,
and she made a rapid calculation of her savings, shrugged
her shoulders and took a half turn to the right. A cup
of coffee and a bun would strengthen her for the encounter
with her employer and, as she sipped and ate,
she could pretend, once more, that her appearance belied
her purse and that she was one of those odd, rich women
who take a pleasure in looking poor. She was good at
pretending and she thanked God sincerely that her self-esteem
had enabled her to resist the effects of condescension,
of the studied kindness which hurts proud
spirits, the slyer variety she had encountered, in her
youth, from men, when compliance and disdain were
equally disastrous to her prosperity, the bullying of people
uncertain of their authority, and the heartlessness of those
who saw her as a machine set going at their order and
unable to stop without another. Her independence had
survived all this and it was, as she knew but could not
regret, her conviction of her dignity as a human being
which, more than any of her faults, had been her misfortune,
but it had its uses when she demanded a bun
and a cup of coffee of young women who respected richer
appetites, and she went on in this confidence, and with
pleasure for though this street might have found itself at
home in any city, she knew what lay beyond it and she
treated herself as she would have treated a child who
thinks it has been cheated of a promise: there was not
much further to go, the surprise was close at hand, and
when it came she rewarded herself with a long sigh of
pleasure.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She stood at the top of a steep hill, lined with shops,
edged with lamp-posts, and the shops and the lamp-posts
seemed to be running, pell-mell, to the bottom, to meet
and lose themselves in the blue mist lying there. Golden
and russet trees were growing in the open space which
the mist now enwrapped, their branches were spangled
with the lights of still more lamps, and though the
colours of the trees were hardly perceptible at that
distance and in the increasing darkness, Hannah’s
memory could reinforce her sight and what she saw was
like a fine painted screen for the cathedral of which
the dark tower could be seen against a sky which
looked pale by contrast. Whether the prospect was as
lovely to others as to her she did not know, nor did it
matter; the wonder of it was that her childish recollections
had not deceived her. She had stood on that spot, for
the first time, thirty years ago when, after a day’s shopping,
she and her parents had halted for a moment before they
made their descent on their way to the station, and the
lights, the mist, the trees peering through a magic lake
of blue, had been no more fairy-like to her then than they
were now. There were things, she told herself, that were
imperishable, but she smiled as she remembered how
her father had attributed the fairy blue to the damp
rising from the river and how her mother had sighed at
the downward jolt. For the small Hannah—and she
pictured herself in her queer clothes and country-made
boots, with her father, gnarled like one of his own apple
trees on one side of her, and her mother, as rosy as the
apples, on the other—it had been a journey of delight
which suffered no diminishment, for no sooner had they
reached the blue and lost, in gaining, it, than they turned
a corner and were in the midst of a confusion as exciting
as a circus, for here huge, coloured tramcars—and
Hannah never lost her love for them—were gathered
round a large triangle of paving, and when one monster,
carefully controlled, glided away to the sound of a bell
and the spluttering of sparks overhead, another would
take its place, and the first would be seen growing smaller
as it gathered speed and swaying in the pleasure of its
own strength. There seemed no end to these leviathans,
with their insides illuminated as, surely, that of Jonah’s
whale had never been, and when she was hustled into
one of them, with pushings from both parents, before she
had had her fill of gazing, she almost lost a glimpse of
the masts and funnels of ships rising, as it seemed, from
the street, and though she was to learn that here a river
carried in a culvert met the water of the docks, knowledge,
which spoils so much, had not deprived the young Hannah,
or the mature one, of a recurring astonishment at the sight.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Much had changed in the city since those days. The
steep street roared with ascending and purred with
descending motor cars; there were more people on the
pavements—where did they come from? Hannah asked,
thinking of the declining birth-rate—but she did not
resent their presence. A throng of people excited her with
its reminder that each separate person had a claim on
life, a demand to make of it as imperious as her own,
and an obligation towards it, a thought that was both
humiliating and enlivening. And she had no miserliness
in her pleasures, no feeling that they were increased by
being hidden. Involuntarily, she half flung out a hand as
though she invited all these strangers to share with her
the beauty spread out below, and it was with regret, but a
pressing hunger, that she turned into a tea shop a few
paces down the street.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER II</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>At this hour when it was too early for dinner and too late
for tea, the shop was almost empty and a lady who was
sitting in full view of the door and who started at Hannah’s
entry, immediately repressed all signs of dismay and
resigned herself to the impossibility of avoiding recognition.
She laid down her knife and fork while Hannah,
on her part, advanced with every appearance of enthusiasm.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Lilla! What luck!’ she exclaimed loudly, and then
chuckled contentedly as her eyes, which were not quite
brown, or green, or grey, surveyed all that was visible
of the seated figure. ‘Just the same!’ she murmured, and
her large, amiable mouth was tilted at the corners. ‘If
I’d pictured how you’d look if I met you—but to tell the
truth, Lilla, I haven’t been thinking of you lately—I
should have imagined you exactly as you are. That hat—so
suitably autumnal, but not wintry—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘For goodness’ sake, sit down Hannah, and lower your
voice a little. What on earth are you doing here?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah sat down, and on the chair occupied by Mrs.
Spenser-Smith’s elegant, monogrammed handbag, she
placed her own shabby one, with a deliberate comparison
of their values which made Lilla jerk her head irritably,
but there was nothing envious in Hannah’s expression
when she looked up.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And your coat!’ she went on. ‘It’s wonderful how
your tailor eliminates that tell-tale thickness at the back
of the middle-aged neck. But perhaps you haven’t got
one. Anyhow, you look very nice and it’s a pleasure to
see you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Spenser-Smith blinked these compliments aside
and remarked, ‘I thought you were in Bradford, or some
place of that sort.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not for years,’ Hannah said, peering across the table
at Lilla’s plate. ‘What are you eating? And why? Have
you caught the restaurant habit, or haven’t you got a
cook?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ve had the same cook for more than ten years,’
Mrs. Spenser-Smith replied loftily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I call that very creditable,’ Hannah said, beckoning to
the waitress and ordering her coffee and bun. ‘I wish
you’d ask her how it’s done.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘By giving satisfaction,’ Mrs. Spenser-Smith replied
loftily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And getting it, I suppose,’ Hannah sighed. ‘Oh well!
What you get on the swings, you lose on the roundabouts,
and I’d rather have my experience than her character,
for what, after all, can she do with it, except keep it?
And it must be an awful responsibility. Worse than
pearls, because you can’t insure it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘On the contrary,’ Mrs. Spenser-Smith began, but
Hannah held up a hand.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I know. I know all the moral maxims. It sounds so
easy. But then, all employers are not like you, Lilla.
This coffee smells very good, but alas, how small the bun
appears! Yes, your servants are well fed, I haven’t a
doubt, and I’m sure their bedrooms are beyond reproach.
You should see the one I’m occupying now! It’s in the
basement, among the beetles. The servant sleeps in the
attic, safe from amorous policemen. Don’t frown so
anxiously, Lilla. I am obviously in no danger.’ She sat
back in her chair and shut her eyes. ‘But I can hear the
ships. I can hear the ships as they come hooting up the
river. D’you know what nostalgia is? It’s what I was
suffering from when, as you put it, I was in “some place
of that sort.” So I spent some of my hard-earned—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Don’t shout,’ Mrs. Spenser-Smith begged.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It doesn’t matter. With your well-known charitable
propensities, I shall only be taken for one of your hangers-on—which
I may be yet, I warn you. I spent quite a lot
of money on Nonconformist religious weeklies, and very
nearly re-established my character by reading them
ostentatiously. But it was the advertisements I was after.
I wanted to be in Radstowe, and Radstowe, I knew, would
proclaim its needs in the religious weeklies. I took the
first offer, at a pittance, too late to see the lilacs and
laburnums, but in time for what, I’m sure, you call the
autumn foliage, Lilla dear. And,’ she added sadly, ‘I
shan’t last until next spring and it was the spring I wanted,
for to-night, as ever is, I fear I’m going to get the sack.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Spenser-Smith frowned again, and after an anxious,
exploring glance which, happily, lighted on no face she
knew, she said sharply, ‘And you sit here, eating cakes!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Lifting her level eyebrows, Hannah looked with amusement
at her plate, where there was a scattering of crumbs.
‘I was always reckless,’ she murmured, and then, with an
air of being politely eager to shift the conversation from
herself, she asked effusively, ‘And how is Ernest? And
how are the children? I should love to see the children!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘They’re at school,’ said Mrs. Spenser-Smith, promptly
putting an end to Hannah’s hopes. ‘Ernest, as usual, is
quite well. He overworks, of course,’ she added, between
pride and resignation. ‘And now, Hannah, what’s this
about losing your situation? And do tell me the truth—if
you can. Who are you living with?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘A tall, gaunt woman with a false hair-front. Dresses
in black—I’m supposed to be mending her second best
at this moment. Even her stays are black and they reach
from her arm-pits to her knees. Wears black beads in
memory of the departed and has his photograph, enlarged
and tinted, on an easel in the drawing-room. Lives in
Channing Square, name of Widdows. Prophetic! I
suppose that’s why he risked it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Don’t be vulgar, Hannah. I think jokes about marriage
are in the very worst taste. Widdows? I’ve never heard
of her.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps that’s why she’s so unpleasant,’ Miss Mole
said gently.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The robin-brightness of Mrs. Spenser-Smith’s brown
eyes was dimmed with disapproval. She was not stupid,
though she chose to let Hannah think her so, and she said
severely, ‘According to you, Hannah, every employer
you’ve ever had was objectionable.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not all,’ Hannah said quickly, ‘but naturally, the ones
I loved I lost—through no fault of my own. They were
exceptional people. The others? Yes, what can you
expect? It’s the what-d’you-call-it of the position, and
perhaps—it’s a long chance but perhaps—there are
people who find Mrs. Widdows lovable.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You don’t adapt yourself,’ Mrs. Spenser-Smith
complained. ‘It was the same at school. You were always
kicking against authority. But you ought to have learnt
sense by this time and if you leave this Mrs. Widdows,
what are you going to do?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t know,’ said Miss Mole, ‘but I really think I’ll
have another bun. I’ve got a spare twopence-halfpenny
in my pocket. I earned it—by sleight-of-hand. Yes,
another of those excellent buns, please, and a curranty
one. Doctors,’ she informed Mrs. Spenser-Smith, ‘tell
us that currants have sustaining properties, and I badly
need them. I don’t know what I’m going to do and
I’m not worrying about it much. I’ve got a whole month
for making plans and I always enjoy the month I’m under
notice. I feel so free and jolly, and there have been
occasions when I’ve been asked to stay on, after all.
Happiness,’ she said, a slight oiliness in her tone, ‘is a
great power for good, is it not?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Tut!’ said Mrs. Spenser-Smith. ‘Don’t try any of that
with me! I know you too well.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Mole chuckled. ‘But not so very well—in Radstowe.
I’ve been careful of your reputation. I haven’t
told a soul that we’re related. I didn’t even put you to
the inconvenience of letting you know I was here. You
should give me credit for that. And if I’d said I was the
cousin, once removed, of Mrs. Spenser-Smith, that old
black cat might have been different for, of course,
everybody knows who you are! But there, I never think
of myself!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If you’d been entirely penniless, it would have been
much better for you,’ Lilla pronounced distinctly. ‘I
suppose that house of yours is let?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘House?’ said Hannah. ‘Oh, you mean my teeny-weeny
cottage.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You get the rent from that, don’t you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I suppose so,’ Hannah said, smiling oddly, ‘but really,
my money has such a trick of slipping through my fingers—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then you can’t go there, when you leave your situation.
You’d better eat humble pie, Hannah, for what’s to
become of you I don’t know.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well,’ said Miss Mole in a drawl, ‘it’s just possible
that I might find myself in your nice red and white house,
and no later than to-morrow, for I may be dismissed
without warning. In your nice house, behind the lace
curtains and the geraniums and the gravel sweep, having
my breakfast in bed, though I’m afraid my calico nightgowns
might shock your housemaid.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I wear calico ones myself,’ said Mrs. Spenser-Smith,
putting the seal of her approval on them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I don’t suppose your housemaid does.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And breakfast in bed is not what you want, Hannah.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That’s all you know about it,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What you want,’ Lilla continued, ‘is a place where
you’ll settle down and be useful, and if you’re useful
you’ll be happy. Now, can’t you make up your mind to
please this Mrs. Widdows?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘She doesn’t want to be pleased. She’s been longing
for the moment when she could turn me out and find
another victim, and now she’s got it. And I’m not afraid
of starving while I have a kind, rich cousin like you, dear.
And an old school-fellow, too! What I want at my age,
which is your own, is a little light work. In a house like
yours, you can surely offer me that. You must want
someone to arrange the flowers and sew the buttons on
your gloves, and I shouldn’t expect to appear at dinner
when there’s company. You wouldn’t have to consider
my feelings, because I haven’t got any, and if the cook
gave notice, I could cook, and if the parlourmaid gave
notice, I should be tripping round the damask.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, I daresay! And spilling the gravy on it! And, as
it happens, my servants don’t give notice. At the first
sign of discontent, they’re told to go.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That’s the way to treat them!’ Hannah cried encouragingly.
‘But if they fell ill, Lilla,’ she leant forward
coaxingly, ‘think what a comfort I should be to you!
And you know, Ernest had always a soft spot in his heart
for me.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ said Lilla, ‘Ernest’s soft spots are often highly
inconvenient. To-day, for instance, when I wanted the
car to take me home after a busy afternoon, he chooses to
lend it to someone else. I have to be at the chapel this
evening for the Literary Society Meeting and I should
be worn out if I made two journeys across the Downs
beforehand.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Good for your figure,’ Hannah said. ‘The time may
come when your tailor won’t be able to cope with it.
So that’s why you’re dining out. I should like to see you
at the Literary Meeting, trying not to yawn. What’s the
subject?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Charles Lamb.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Hardy annual,’ Hannah muttered, twitching her nose.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s a duty,’ Mrs. Spenser-Smith said patiently, yet
with a touch of grandeur. ‘I’d much rather stay at home
with a nice book, but these things have to be supported,
for the sake of the young people.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah yes, but it isn’t the young people who go to them.
It’s the old girls, like myself, who have nothing else to
do. I’ve seen them, sitting on the hard benches, half
asleep, like fowls gone to roost.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘They’ll go to sleep to-night,’ Lilla admitted, ‘though,’
she added as she remembered to keep Hannah in her
place, ‘I don’t see why you should try to be funny at their
expense. Trying to be funny is one of your failings.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Mole answered meekly. ‘I know I ought never to
see a joke unless my superiors make one, and then I’ve
got to be convulsed with admiring merriment. I’ve no
right to a will nor an opinion of my own, but somehow—I’m
that contrary!—I insist on laughing when I’m amused
and exercising my poor intelligence. Let me come with
you to-night, Lilla, and I might make a speech.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You might make a fool of yourself,’ said Mrs. Spenser-Smith,
picking up her modestly rich fur necklet and
settling it at her throat. ‘Go back to Channing Square,
at once, and do, for goodness sake, try to see which side
your bread is buttered. And, in any case, Mr. Blenkinsop’s
lecture wouldn’t entertain you. He’s rather a dull
young man. What’s the matter?’ she asked, for Hannah
had put down the bun she was lifting towards her mouth
and the mouth remained open.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Such a funny name!’ Hannah murmured. She leaned
back and folded her hands on her lap. ‘I like to coordinate—or
whatever the word is—my impressions with
other people’s facts. Now, that name. I should have
suspected its owner of being a dull young man, a rather
owlish young man, with a Biblical Christian name. Am
I right?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘His name is Samuel,’ said Mrs. Spenser-Smith,
impatient with this topic.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And he’s a member of your chapel?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not a very worthy one, I’m sorry to say. He’s highly
irregular.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Now Hannah leaned forward, her eyes sparkling.
‘You’re not going to tell me he’s a bit of a rake?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>The droop of Mrs. Spenser-Smith’s eyelids effaced a
world which had any acquaintance with rakes. ‘Irregular
in his attendance on Sundays,’ she said coldly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That upsets one of my theories, but it’s interesting.
Are you going, Lilla? Try to find a corner for me in your
red and white house. I’ve been past it several times.
I like the colour scheme. The conjunction of the yellow
gravel with the geraniums—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘The geraniums are over,’ Lilla said, ‘and what colour
do you expect gravel to be? I shall ask Ernest if he knows
of any suitable post for you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ernest’s reply will be obvious. You’d better not ask
him.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And then I’ll write to you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Don’t bother, don’t bother,’ Miss Mole said airily.
‘I’ll come to tea one afternoon. These,’ she smiled
maliciously, ‘are not my best clothes—but very nearly.
My shoes, however,’ she thrust out a surprisingly elegant
foot, ‘will always stand inspection.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Spenser-Smith gave an unwilling, downward
glance. ‘Absurd!’ she said. ‘You’ve no sense of proportion.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yet I risked this one,’ Hannah pointed to her right
foot, ‘without a thought for its beauty. Fortunately, it’s
hardly scratched.’ She looked up, her face rejuvenated
by mischief. ‘I broke a window with it, Lilla.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Incredulity struggled with curiosity in Mrs. Spenser-Smith,
and curiosity with her determination to deny
Hannah the pleasure of thinking herself interesting.
‘Pooh!’ she said lightly, and then her unpractised imagination
took a clumsy flight. ‘You don’t mean to tell me
that woman had locked you out of the house?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t mean to tell you anything,’ Miss Mole said
sweetly, and with the smile on her lips she watched her
cousin’s admirable exit which was designed to show the
increasing number of people in the shop that she was of
very different quality from that of the person she left
behind her.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER III</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>All over Upper Radstowe, in late spring-time, the
pavements are strewn with flecks of colour, as though
there had been a wedding in every house, for petals of
pink and white, purple and yellow, lie there, dropped as
a benison on the approach of summer. Before this,
urged by the warm rain, the trees open their new leaves
slowly, carefully unwrapping the yearly surprise which
never grows stale, and the flowers which come afterwards
are like happy laughter at its success. The dropping of
the petals has a gracious resignation in it for, without
them, the smaller flowering trees have lost their beauty
for the year; their greenness is merged into the general
greenness of the summer and they have no splendour to
offer autumn. Miss Mole had missed the spring in
Radstowe, she had missed the almond blossom—a faint
pink against a bright blue sky or rosy against a grey one—she
had missed the lilacs and laburnums and the double
cherry, the tall tulips in the gardens and the consciousness
that, across the river, primroses were growing on grassy
banks; she had seen the summer and made the best of the
only season she did not care for and here was autumn,
prodigal of its gold and bronze, and there were moments
when she renounced her allegiance to the spring or,
rather, yoked with it a new allegiance to the autumn which
was responsible for spring’s increase. In spring she knew
that something both exciting and beautiful would happen
with each day while her pleasure in the autumn was as
much anticipatory as immediate. Like a man gloating
over the wine bottles with which he means to stock his
cellar, enjoying the variations in the shapes and sizes of
the bottles and the colours of their contents, but looking
forward to the day of the wine’s maturity, Hannah watched
the big trees in this time of their brilliance, and with a
contentment which was not of the eye alone, saw it
lying in heaps at their feet. She was a farmer’s
daughter; she had a feeling for the earth and liked to
see it nourished and though she had been dowered
with a constant desire for beauty, and found it
sufficient in itself, there was an added satisfaction in
knowing it was feeding what it came from, and so, when
she wandered about Upper Radstowe that October,
finding unexpected little streets, paved lanes and winding
paths or flights of steps, leading from the Upper to the
Lower Radstowe; when she strolled down the long
Avenue where, on one side, well set back from the road,
there were large houses screened by one row of the elms,
and on the other, screened by the opposing row, a stretch
of tree-laden grass ending in a cliff which bound the river;
when she walked on the Downs dotted with well-grown
hawthorn bushes which were almost insignificant in that
expanse, where the sense of the river, out of sight, was
always present and the voices of the ships came with
challenge or complaint, she could feel that while her own
affairs were in a sad condition, those of the earth were
doing well and beautifully.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Until she was fourteen years old, she had only seen
Radstowe in snatches of a day, when her parents had
business in the city and allowed her to accompany them,
and there had been torture as well as pleasure in the
expeditions, for her father would linger at the cattle
market and her mother spend an unreasonable time in the
shops. It was maddening to know that there were intricate
miles of river and docks to be explored, ferry boats
awaiting her at the cost of a halfpenny a journey, broad
bridges spanning the water, narrow ones, without railings,
across the locks, big ships with sacks of flour sliding into
their holds, slow-moving cranes dangling their burdens
with apparent unwillingness to let them go; it was maddening
to see these things only in glimpses or in a desperate
sally from which she was recalled by the anxiety of
her mother or the anger of her father and by her own
premature knowledge that these two were, in effect,
younger than she was and must not be distressed. In a
vague way, she was always sorry for them: there must
have been a few years during which they represented
authority and wisdom but, within her memory, they were
a little pathetic in their slowness and in their silences
which were only broken for the utterance of what they
thought were facts, and physically they seemed very old—they
were both in middle life when Hannah was born—while
she could afford to postpone her explorations.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This capacity for waiting and believing that the good
things were surely approaching had served Hannah very
well through a life which most people would have found
dull and disappointing. She refused to see it so: it would
have been treachery to herself. Her life was almost her
only possession and she was as tender with it as a mother
with a defective child: there was no doubt it would improve,
the big miracle would happen and, meanwhile,
there were the smaller ones such as this chance to rove
at her will through Upper Radstowe, to cross the suspension
bridge and reach the woods covering the high
banks on the southern side of the river, or to go further
afield—and Mrs. Gibson was astonished at her energy—and
find the real country where the wind smelt of apples
and damp moss. It was the first such chance she had had
for though, in her fifteenth year, she had been sent to
school in Upper Radstowe, her excursions were necessarily
restricted and never solitary, but she learnt to
love the place and she kept her childish wonder, she
grew familiar with the colours of the changing seasons,
she accepted the frequent rain without resentment and
she could never be grateful enough for that spasm of
emulation which had induced her father to send his
Hannah to school with his rich cousin’s Lilla. In doing
this he outraged his belief that what he called a fancy
education was a stumbling block to a plain farmer’s
daughter, he stretched his resources further than they
would easily go and Hannah had often wondered what
obscure antagonism had flowered in so unlikely a manner
and with such advantage to herself. It was the one
impulsive action she remembered in a man as little given
to eccentricity as one of his own turnips, but she had seen
turnips grown to odd shapes and something comparable
to these distortions had happened in the case of Farmer
Mole. She had stayed at the school until she was eighteen,
for she was not to leave a day before Lilla did, and this
was an extravagance which, she suspected, gave her
father a grim pleasure, while it set her mother clucking
over the continued difficulties of Hannah’s wardrobe.
How was she to have a dress for the dancing class, another
for Sundays and still another for afternoons unless Mrs.
Mole, with the help of the village dressmaker, could alter
some of her own clothes? Fortunately, in the days when
she was married, materials were made to last, and among
the strange garments Hannah took to school were a
black watered silk, a prune-coloured merino, and a delaine
patterned with large pansies. They lasted a long time,
and as Hannah remained thin, though she grew to a
moderate height, and her mother’s wedding garments
were voluminous, there was always enough stuff with
which to lengthen the dresses: they suffered strange
partnerships, separations and reunions: they were a thorn
in the flesh they covered, but Hannah was never seen to
wince. It was Lilla who did that and Hannah enjoyed
seeing her do it, yet she had an amused affection for this
cousin who had such an air of dignity and importance,
such a fixed view of what was proper, even in her teens.
With her sanguine colour and her bright eyes, for which
she had an evident admiration, with the clothes which
were too rich and fashionable for a school girl, and her
slight pomposity, Lilla was as ludicrous to Hannah as
was Hannah’s appearance to everybody else. But the
offensive laughter of these convention-ridden young
people stopped there. She saw to it that they should
laugh at the rest of her only if she chose, and now, when
she was nearly forty, she could appreciate the cleverness—she
would not call it courage—which she had shown at
fourteen, in persuading scoffers that those dreadful
clothes were the symbol of her high difference from
themselves.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah often walked past the plain-fronted white
house from which the sound of piano practice still came
in the strange, discordant, yet satisfying jumble which
gave her a glorious sense of liberty. She had soon been
released from the bondage of her own hopeless efforts
and when she heard scales tripping lightly from one
direction, stumbling and starting again from another,
while The Merry Peasant took advantage of the pauses,
or the Rachmaninoff Prelude assured him he was of no
importance, she tasted again an exquisite pleasure of her
youth. It was a house which just missed character. It
stood four stories high in the middle, there was a lower
wing at each side and a walled garden encompassed it.
At the front there was a wrought iron gate for visitors
and mistresses and, at the back, a door for everybody else,
but the glory of the gate had departed: it was rusty and
needed paint, and the house itself was shabby. The houses
in Upper Radstowe had a way of growing shabby and
when Hannah stood at the gate, peering in, she fancied
that thus the ghosts of the eighteenth century must stand
and look at their fine houses going to decay, let out in
flats, with the gathered perambulators and bicycles of the
inhabitants cumbering the stately entrance halls. No
doubt they found a mournful enjoyment in their memories
and exalted them, and the difference between those
ghosts and Hannah was that she had a present which
did not suffer from comparison with the past. She had
no illusions about the wonderful happiness or the misunderstood
misery of her girlhood: she had been alive
and interested then, as she was now, and if the possibilities
of her future were limited by the exigencies of time,
this limitation had its value, since what was going to
happen must be nearer than it had ever been before.
She must be within shouting distance of the rich old
gentleman who was going to leave her a fortune, or the
moderately rich one who would leave her a competency.
Again, lessening her demands of Fortune, she might
meet, at any turn of the road, the perfect employer who
would appreciate Hannah Mole and keep her as a friend
of the family when the need for her services was past
and who, to the brief announcement in <span class='it'>The Times</span> of
Hannah’s death, would add a little tribute of affection.
She would be the confidant of the young people as they
grew up, the wise and humorous counsellor.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She roused herself from these visions which were
passing across the discoloured front of her old school.
She was on her way to visit Lilla and she must at least
pretend to be practical, she must concoct the mixture of
truth and falsehood suitable to that lady’s palate. A week
had passed since their meeting in the teashop and for all
but a few hours of that week she had been lodged in Mrs.
Gibson’s house, she had been under the same roof as
Mr. Samuel Blenkinsop. That would have to be explained
and Hannah neither wished nor intended to tell
the truth. It involved the private affairs of other people
and it was always pleasant to deceive Lilla and to tease
her. Moreover, it was doubtful whether the truth would
appear to her as probable. She would merely tell Hannah
to edit her stories more carefully. And truth, after all,
was a relative good: it had to be adulterated and adapted,
like a drug, to the constitution of each individual, and
Hannah would describe neither her first nor her second
visit to the house in Prince’s Road.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She had called there after meeting Lilla, and the
little maid in her large cap, who still showed signs of her
agitation earlier in the evening, had led her into Mrs.
Gibson’s comfortable presence. Mrs. Gibson’s anxieties
were incapable of disturbing a basic serenity compounded
of mental sluggishness, good nature and physical well-being,
and though she was still somewhat shaken, she
was in no danger of collapse. She was glad to see Hannah
again. Everything was going on as well as could be
expected, but Mr. Blenkinsop was upset, and a chat was
just what she needed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And why should Mr. Blenkinsop be upset?’ Hannah
demanded. ‘He hasn’t tried to kill himself and he isn’t
married to a man who has! He isn’t the baby of an unsuccessful
suicide! He ought to count his blessings—and
I’m one of them. If it hadn’t been for me—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I know!’ said Mrs. Gibson. ‘So quick, you were, too!
And how you ever thought of breaking the window—But
there, Mr. Blenkinsop is very respectable and he
was always against me letting the basement as a flat.
He said we’d get undesirables, and there,’ Mrs. Gibson
pointed downwards, ‘sure enough, they are.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If it hadn’t been for me,’ Hannah persisted, ‘there
would have been an inquest. How would Mr. Blenkinsop
have liked that? I’m no more used to suicides than he
is—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Certainly not!’ Mrs. Gibson said courteously.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I tried to give Mrs. Ridding the impression that
there was nothing unusual about it. It was the least one
could do, but much more than he did.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It was a pity he came along when he did,’ Mrs. Gibson
sighed. ‘It’s true I was looking out for him. It was either
him or a policeman, until you bumped into me, and then
I’m sure there was no need for anybody else. I’d been
shouting myself hoarse through the keyhole, but what
was the use of that when he’d locked the door on the
inside? And that poor young thing! And the baby
crying! Dear, dear! Well, let’s hope it will be a lesson
to him. He’s in bed now and I’m going to coax her up
here for a bit of supper.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And what will Mr. Blenkinsop say to that?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m hoping he won’t find out,’ Mrs. Gibson replied
simply. ‘When he settled down here after his mother
died, he hoped I’d see my way to keeping other lodgers
out. He pays well, but I made no promise. I like a bit
of company.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then,’ said Hannah, ‘will you take me in to-morrow?
I can’t pay like Mr. Blenkinsop, but I promise not to put
my head in a gas oven. It may be for a few days, or a few
weeks. I don’t know. I shall be out of a situation.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Why,’ said Mrs. Gibson, mildly astonished, ‘I thought
you must be a lady with an independence.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Plenty of independence, but it doesn’t fill my pockets.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well I never!’ Mrs. Gibson exclaimed. ‘You see,
I noticed your shoes. I was always rather noticing. And
then, with you being so prompt and managing—but still,
I do admit, it’s comfortable to know you’re one more
like myself.’</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER IV</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>This was the story which had to be re-arranged for Lilla’s
benefit, but Hannah trusted to the inspiration of the
moment and wasted no time which could be spent on the
beauty of the October day. The sun shone with the
peculiar brightness of autumn and, in passing through
the trees and gilding them, it seemed to borrow as it gave
and strike the heaps of fallen leaves with added strength.
The streets had the white, swept appearance given by
the East wind, chimneys and roofs made sharp lines on
the blue sky, and sounds of voices, footsteps, cars and carts
and horses, had an unusual resonance. Michaelmas
daisies and dahlias flowered in the gardens, there were
berries on the rowan trees, the world seemed to be flying
every flag it had, and, when Hannah crossed The Green,
the fall of a chestnut sounded stealthy, as though its
descent were a little shameful in the general glory. It
lay among the leaves, a glossy roan, bursting from its
green, spiked shell, and she stooped to pick it up, but
left it lying there. When the children came out of school
one of them would find it and, for her, to remember the
feeling of that polished ball was just as good as to handle
it. Indeed, she thought, it was better, for the good thing
remembered or hoped for had a blessed superiority over
the thing grasped, and she fancied that God, finding
the decent order of his plans upset by the wilfulness of
the creatures for whom he made them, had been tenderly
inspired with this idea of compensation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And a good thing, too!’ she muttered, glancing at the
clock on the otherwise conscientiously Early English
Church.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was no time to go round the hill and look at the
river: she must go down Chatterton Street, which had
a turning into Channing Square, and risk encountering
Mrs. Widdows. The risk was not great. She would be
dozing, poor thing, over the fire in the stuffy little sitting-room,
while the woman she had dismissed with contumely—that
was a good word, though Hannah was
never sure how to pronounce it—was taking a part in
this fine pageant. She realized that her contribution was
purely spiritual: there was nothing ornamental in her
appearance and her clothes were always of a useful
shade, but she held up her head and walked briskly,
enjoying the snap of twigs and the sibilance of leaves under
her feet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The narrow road she was following widened at its
juncture with several others. The Avenue was stately
on her left hand, another road, shaded by trees, came
curling up from the river: on her right, a broader one
skirted that edge of the Downs which she could reach by
the short ascent in front of her, and the ends of all these
roads were held together, as in a knot, by a drinking
fountain for men and beasts.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was hard to believe that the big, sprawling city was
so near. This was a place for leisure, for genteel strolling,
for long crocodiles of school-girls who must partake of
the elegant beauties of nature among their other forms
of nourishment, and ladies in small bonnets and bustles
should have been walking under the trees. Here there
was no impingement of new on old or of shabbiness on
prosperity, and Hannah would have felt less affection
for this part of Upper Radstowe, lovely as the trees made
it, if it had not grown out of the older one and if she had
not known that her own country, wild under its demureness,
grey-rocked under its springy turf, lay just across
the water.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The Downs were not the country, but they came as
near it as they could. They stretched away, almost out
of sight, rimmed by distant roads and houses on all sides
but the cliffed one, and great trees as well as hawthorn
bushes grew there. A double row of elms marched
straight towards Lilla’s house and, as Hannah walked in
their dappled shadows, she heard the thud of hooves and
the creak of leather and the jingle of steel, and it seemed
to fit the mixed character of the Downs that these riders
should be on hired horses, that the sheep, industriously
nibbling, should have dirty fleeces, and that voices thick
with the Radstowe burr should come from the throats
of youths kicking a football. But always, even, it seemed
to Hannah, when it rained, the clouds sailed higher over
that part of the world than elsewhere, and she had heard
Lilla say that, except on Saturdays and Sundays, the view
from her windows had almost the appearance of a private
park. Unfortunately, Lilla’s house, which was already
discernible as a red and white blot beyond the trees,
could not be mistaken for one of England’s stately homes.
It had been built for Ernest’s father towards the end of
his life, and the attempt to produce something like a small
Elizabethan manor house had been frustrated by his
determination that there should be no misunderstanding
about its origin, and below the flat gables of the top
storey, bow windows and a porch bulged on the ground
floor; the tiles were the reddest procurable and white
stucco concealed the bricks. The garden was separated
from the road by its own width of greensward guarded
by posts and chains, and this indication that the Spenser-Smiths
had more than enough garden to spare was
callously interpreted by urchins as an invitation to swing
on the chains. Even Lilla’s ointment had a fly in it,
Hannah thought, beaming on a culprit who had expected
a frown, and she blinked affectedly, for her own amusement,
when she opened the gate and met the full glare
of white and red and yellow under the sunshine.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The doorstep was spotless, the knocker gleamed,
potted chrysanthemums were arranged in tiers in the
porch, and Hannah had her nose against a flower and was
savouring its sweet bitterness, when the door opened.
From the parlour-maid’s point of view, this was a bad
beginning, and either in punishment or on her quick
estimate of this caller’s place in the world, she took
Hannah to a small room which had a feeling of not being
lived in. Here the humble and the suppliant sat on the
edges of the chairs; here were kept the books which were
not obviously the ones for the Spenser-Smiths to
possess. The classics, Hannah guessed, were displayed
somewhere to advantage, and these were the pickings
from book-stalls, children’s books and those by writers of
whose eminence and respectability Lilla was not assured.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah took down a volume and prepared to wait, but
Lilla, apparently, was anxious to know the worst as soon
as possible, and after tactfully showing annoyance that
Hannah should have been left in a room without a fire,
she took her cousin into a drawing-room bright with gay
cretonne, a wood fire and sunshine, and asked cheerfully
if this were her free afternoon.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, yes, as you might say and in a manner of speaking,
it is. And a very nice afternoon, too. It will help us
through the winter, as they always say. And this is a very
nice room. You see, Lilla, all’s right with my world.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m very glad to hear it,’ Mrs. Spenser-Smith said
with reserve. She had had some experience of Hannah’s
high spirits. ‘Are you going to stay to tea?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If you press me like that, dear, of course I will. Time
exists for me no longer, unless I’m hungry, and there
are ways of misleading one’s stomach. By staying in bed
till ten o’clock, I can manage on a cup of tea till the
middle of the day; you’re giving me a free meal and I
shall be in bed with a book before the pangs begin again.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘For goodness sake,’ said Lilla, who had rung the bell,
‘don’t talk any of your nonsense while Maud’s bringing
in the tea. And afterwards, you’d better tell me what
you mean by it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I mean,’ said Hannah, when the ban of silence was
removed, ‘that I’m resting at present, as we say on the
stage. Remark the pronoun, Lilla. I was on the stage
once, you know. In a crowd. And they let me wear my
own clothes!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then, if I were you,’ said Lilla, ‘I should be careful
not to mention it. How you could do it! But I don’t
suppose you really did. And true or not, if you say
things like that, what’s going to become of you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It was a virtuous crowd,’ Hannah said meekly. ‘We
were all booing a bad man. You can’t ask more than that.
I booed for a week and they picked up another shabby
female in the next town.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t want to hear about it,’ Lilla said. ‘For your
own sake, you’d better not tell me what you know I shan’t
approve of.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah,’ said Hannah, ‘what’s your little scheme?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Lilla tightened her lips. ‘I don’t know that I’m justified
in having one.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That doesn’t matter in the least, dear.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It matters to me,’ she said, and then, with a quick
change from the noble to the practical, she asked sharply,
‘Did you get a month’s wages?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>A little shamefaced, Hannah nodded her head. ‘I did.
I managed to be unbearably irritating without being
actually rude, so she could neither keep nor rob me. It
took some doing, I can tell you. And I was longing to
be rude—personally abusive, you know—but there,
I don’t suppose you do; you’re so genteel.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Lilla pushed a cushion behind her back, wreaking on
the impassivity of down the annoyance which would
have made as little permanent impression on Hannah.
‘And where are you staying now? You didn’t go the same
night, I suppose?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No. The next morning—in a cab.’ She spoke slowly
and her eyes had the fixity of careful thought. ‘A horse
cab, with a beery, bottle-nosed old man on the box.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t want details.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘They’re part of the story and old bottle-nose is the
knight-errant. It’s a pity his type is dying out. They
know a lot about life, those old men, and I like them.
They always believe the worst and they don’t mind a
bit. He knew what had happened at once and I’m sorry
to tell you that he winked at me. No, I didn’t wink back,
but I let him know that I knew how and then I told him
I wanted some cheap lodgings and he said he knew the
very place for me. And so he did. He took me to a house
in Prince’s Road, quite near your place of worship, dear,
and I’m sure you’ll feel quite happy about me because
Mrs. Gibson is a member of the congregation. I would
have let you know sooner, but I’ve been so busy in the
free library, looking at the advertisements.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Nothing,’ said Lilla after a pause, ‘could have been
more unfortunate.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Why? I call it very lucky. Only a pound a week for
a bed-sitting room, a shilling in the slot for the gas fire,
and a share of Mrs. Gibson’s dinner for practically
nothing. She’s far too generous, but I try to help her
and she says she finds my conversation very bright.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Most unfortunate!’ Lilla repeated. ‘And why that
cabman should have taken you to one of the houses
I should have wished you to avoid, is more than I can
understand.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It seems quite respectable,’ Hannah murmured. ‘Mr.
Blenkinsop lives there, you know.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Of course I know it! But I suppose you don’t see
much of him?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘As much as I can,’ Hannah answered cheerfully.
‘But he’s rather a shy bird. And if you’re worrying
about what I’ve told these people, you can set your mind
at rest. The name of Spenser-Smith has never passed
my lips. Mrs. Gibson wouldn’t feel at ease with me if
she knew I had such grand connections.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Lilla assumed the expression with which she tried to
counter Hannah’s attacks. It was almost, but not quite,
blank. She gave the cushion another push and said,
‘I was thinking of this silly way of talking about
theatres. It doesn’t do, Hannah. It may be bright,’
she made the word astonishingly acid, ‘but it will be remembered
against you. The fact is—mind, I’m not sure
about it, but I do want you to be careful—there’s a chance
that I can get you a post as Mr. Corder’s housekeeper.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Who’s he? Oh, I know. The minister. Does he want
one?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No,’ said Lilla, compressing her lips again, ‘but I
think he ought to have one.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then he’s doomed,’ said Hannah. ‘Thank you, Lilla.
I take this very kind. What’s the salary?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Nothing’s settled. You mustn’t count on it. Mr.
Corder is a widower and he’s talking it over with his
daughter.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, he’s got a daughter.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Two,’ said Lilla. ‘Ruth is still at school and somebody
ought to look after her. The other night at the Literary
meeting——’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Was Mr. Blenkinsop amusing?’ Hannah interpolated.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No. He didn’t seem to be thinking about what he was
saying.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No wonder!’ Hannah murmured. ‘But go on, dear,
go on. At the Literary meeting——?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ruth had a large hole in her stocking. It looks so bad.
Ethel’s useless, she’s always at the Mission, and I’ve
been thinking for some time that they ought to have a
responsible woman in the house. There’s only a skimpy
little servant and there’s a young man cousin who lives
with them—Mr. Corder’s son is at Oxford and, between
you and me, Hannah, I make that possible—and I don’t
think it’s quite nice, but I wasn’t going to suggest
anything until I could recommend somebody. There
are plenty of women in the chapel who would jump at
the chance, but I was fond of Mrs. Corder—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Say no more, dear!’ Hannah exclaimed. ‘I understand
it all! You want a good, solid sand-bag to fill up the gap;
you want a watchdog, of no breed or beauty, but warranted
to bark; your affection for the poor woman’s
memory is stronger than his and you’re not going to let
him forget her altogether. Quite right!’ Hannah’s thin,
odd face was glowing, her eyes, greener than usual,
shone. ‘It’s not complimentary to me, but it’s magnificent
and I’ll bark like fury. And they say women are not loyal
to each other! Why, already, I feel like a sister to Mrs.
What’s-her-name myself!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Don’t be ridiculous,’ said Mrs. Spenser-Smith. ‘I
liked Mrs. Corder well enough. She was rather a nonentity,
compared with him, poor little woman, but I believe
she did her best, and when I see that Patsy Withers
making eyes at him——’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ll remember the name,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You haven’t got the post yet,’ Lilla said sharply, ‘and
I don’t believe you’re really fit for it. I’ve stretched a
point, Hannah. I don’t suppose you could produce a
written character which Mr. Corder would look at twice,
and goodness knows what you’ve been doing all these
years, and if you go, I do hope you’ll remember that I’ve
practically guaranteed you. And, by the way, I’ve said
nothing about our relationship. I thought it wouldn’t
be fair to either of you. I want you to go there on your
own merits. I mentioned this to Ernest and he quite
agrees.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah smiled with pleasant maliciousness and said
nothing, but she gave the impression of being ready to
say a good deal and Lilla went on hastily. ‘I’ll let you
know what happens. I shall see him at the week-night
service.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But won’t he want to see me?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not necessary,’ said Mrs. Spenser-Smith in her best
Spenser-Smithian manner.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not advisable, you mean! I daresay you’re right.
What sort of man is he? Is he brisk and hearty, or one
of those gentle paw-folders?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That isn’t funny, Hannah, it’s vulgar; I might say
irreverent. Do try to remember you’re a lady.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I’m not. I come of the same stock as you do,
Lilla, and we know what that is. Simple yeoman stock,
and my father often dropped his aitches and so did yours.
I know you don’t like remembering it, but there’s the
fact. I happened to be educated above my station—though
you, of course, were not!—and there are times
when I revert—revert, Lilla! But I’ll try to behave
myself and I’ll keep my eye on Patsy. Thank you for the
tea, and now I’ll go back to Mrs. Gibson and cobble up
some of my underclothes, though I hope they’ll be a
matter of indifference to the Reverend Corder.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘There you are again!’ Lilla said with a sigh, and she
offered her cool, rosy face to be kissed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s only a bit of fun between us girls!’ Hannah cried,
and as she brushed her cheek against her cousin’s, she
added, ‘You’re a good soul, Lilla. I always liked you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, go along with you,’ Lilla said good-naturedly and
gently urged her to the door. There was no knowing
what generous foolishness Ernest would commit, if he
found her in the house when he came home.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER V</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>The wind had risen strongly as night came on and
Hannah crossed the Downs under swaying branches and
swirling leaves. The football-players, the riders, the
children had all gone home; lamps edged the roads but,
where Hannah walked under the elms, there was a stormy
darkness. The branches creaked lugubriously or with
shrill protest, and those which still kept their leaves were
like great flails, threshing the winds, maddened by
their sterile efforts, for it was the wind, threshing harder,
that produced the harvest, whipping it from the trees
and driving it before him. Hannah was driven, too; a wisp
of a woman, exhilarated by the noise and the buffeting.
Lilla’s comfortable, bright room seemed unreal to her,
Mr. Corder was the invention of an idle moment and
Hannah Mole had no past, no future, only this breathless
present when the wind would have had her go westwards
and she was making for the south. For ten minutes or a
quarter of an hour, until she reached lower ground and
the shelter of the streets, where the wind did its best
with the trees in the gardens but found their weaker
resistance a dull affair, she had that freedom from care
which is the reward of exciting physical effort; but in the
comparative quiet of Chatterton Road she became conscious
of the self which needed money for food and
clothing and, absurdly, she saw it handed to her by Mr.
Corder on one of his own offertory plates. She shook
her head and made a grimace of refusal. She had
a prejudice against Nonconformist ministers, she
pictured Mr. Corder according to the pattern in her
mind, ignorantly unctuous, pretending to a humility
which was patently absent, and she had a moment of
rebellion. She could see herself clearly enough with
other people’s eyes: she was drab, she was nearing, if she
had not reached, middle-age, she bore the stamp of a
woman who had always worked against the grain, she was,
in fact, the ideal housekeeper for Mr. Corder. She
admitted that no one sitting in his dining-room and
mending his woven underwear at a table with a rusty
little fern in the middle of a green serge cloth, could
look more suitable than Hannah Mole. Who would
suspect her of a sense of fun and irony, of a passionate
love for beauty and the power to drag it from its hidden
places? Who could imagine that Miss Mole had pictured
herself, at different times, as an explorer in strange lands,
as a lady wrapped in luxury and delicate garments, as the
mother of adorably naughty children and the inspiringly
elusive mistress of a poet? She could turn up her own
long nose at these fanciful excursions, without convincing
herself of their improbability. The desires, the energy,
the gaiety were there, but they were ruled by an ironic
conception of herself which did not seem inconsistent and
which was also the armour she assumed against the world
when it was not willing to be friendly. And, after all, as
she told herself, quelling her useless rebellion, the things
she wanted, if she had them, would soon turn into those
she wanted no longer and—here was God’s happy idea
of compensation again—she found a wealth of amusement
in going about disguised, while because her clear-sightedness
was not kept entirely for the weaknesses of others,
she had to own that she who had been a failure in the lot
forced on her, was not likely to be a success in any one
she chose. She was a vagrant and with the vagrant’s
advantages, the readiness to move on, the carelessness of
possessions, she had to support the inconvenience of
being moved on before she was ready to go and of finding
herself poorer than was comfortable. Now both these
conditions had befallen her. Few things, she thought at
that moment, could be more distasteful than leaving the
house where she was treated as a friend, where she had
a sly, lazy pleasure in listening to Mrs. Gibson’s platitudes
and a keener one in discomfiting Mr. Blenkinsop by
waylaying him on the stairs and forcing him into conversation;
a house which she could leave at her caprice for a
saunter round Upper Radstowe or a long walk on the
other side of the river, to which she could return with the
certainty of a welcome, and she must resign all this for
the sake of mending Mr. Corder’s daughter’s stockings
and keeping herself fed and clad.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Yet it was better to be Hannah Mole than to be Lilla
who could see herself as one person only, and that was
Mrs. Spenser-Smith, who had never broken a basement
window to save a man from gas poisoning, dragged him
from the neighbourhood of the oven, and then consoled
the baby who was crying, neglected, in his perambulator:
better than to be poor little Mrs. Ridding with that strange
look on her face. It was the look, Hannah thought, of
someone who had braced herself for approaching an
inevitable catastrophe and seen its postponement with
despair. The look had no more than flashed across her
face but Hannah had seen it and she could recall it
plainly now, in the darkness. ‘Oh, for money!’ Hannah
moaned, not thinking of herself. Money could cause
neurotics to be cured or, if it failed in that, it could
enable a young widow to bring up her boy, and Hannah
began to desire it passionately. She had heard Lilla speak
with grand disparagement of it, but that was just what
Lilla, who had always had it, would take care to do.
Money was one of the best things in the world, used
properly, used by Miss Hannah Mole, and all the way
down Prince’s Road she was buying annuities for people
like herself, settling some thousands of pounds on Mrs.
Ridding, and sending people Christmas cards and valentines
in the shape of five pound notes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When she reached Mrs. Gibson’s house she saw a light
in the basement kitchen and, through the mended window,
which was open, she could hear Mrs. Ridding singing.
Hannah’s big mouth drooped. She heard that singing
every morning before Mr. Ridding went to work and
every evening when he came home, but never at any
other time of day, and it hurt her that anyone so young
should be so unhappy and so brave. She was ashamed
of her own discontent and her concentration on herself.
What happened to her, who had lived more than half
her life and had some fun in it and, yes, one mad, romantic
interlude, was of very little importance now, but Mrs.
Ridding was a girl and Hannah’s large, erratic heart was
aching for her. And there was nothing she could do.
Her funds of advice—which she did not take herself—of
drollery, of encouragement, were of no use, for Mrs.
Ridding was very bright and cold with the witnesses of
that sordid scene in the basement, even with the woman
who had comforted and bathed the baby. Hannah wished
she could bath the baby again. Mrs. Gibson had been
much impressed by her handling of him; Mrs. Gibson, in
fact, admired everything Hannah did, and perhaps it
would be salutary for her to live with a man who was
much more likely to admire what he did himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah turned the lock with the latch-key Mrs. Gibson lent
her and found Mr. Blenkinsop hanging up his hat in the hall.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, good evening, Mr. Blenkinsop!’ she exclaimed
girlishly. ‘You’re rather late, aren’t you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Blenkinsop looked at her severely through his
spectacles. ‘Purposely,’ he remarked significantly, and
stood aside to let her pass up the stairs before him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah went ahead meekly. She had not yet found
the manner to which Mr. Blenkinsop would respond.
She had tried to deepen the impression which her prowess
in the basement kitchen must have made on him; she had
hinted that she, too, had an interest in literature and
Charles Lamb; she had asked foolish feminine questions
about banking, which was Mr. Blenkinsop’s profession,
but nothing stirred him. He remained grave, solid, and as
monosyllabic as language and bare courtesy would allow.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Sickening!’ she said to herself, straightening her back,
for she knew that the view, from below, of a woman
ascending the stairs is often unfortunate, but when she
had turned on the light in her room and looked at her
reflection, she forgave him, though she had not done
with him yet. Mr. Blenkinsop was clearly not a reader
of character or a connoisseur of human rarities, and there
was no reason why he should encourage the attentions
of this woman with the satirical nose, a rather sallow skin
and eyes of no particular colour, yet she felt as uneasy
as a soldier in a hostile country who has left an unconquered
fortified place behind him. She wished she
had introduced the subject of Mr. Corder; that might
have roused him and instructed her at the same time.
Forewarned was forearmed and Mrs. Gibson’s views would
be of no value. To her, all reverend gentlemen were
good and most of them were awful; they were like the
stars; they shed their light, but they were unapproachable.
However, though there was no doubt about what she
would say, her way of saying it might be amusing, and
when Hannah had changed her outdoor dress for an old
silk one which looked well enough by artificial light, she
tapped on Mrs. Gibson’s sitting-room door and popped
in without waiting for a summons.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, there you are, dear,’ Mrs. Gibson sighed. ‘Always
so cheerful!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What’s the matter?’ Hannah asked, for Mrs. Gibson’s
voice was melancholy and she was sunk in her chair as
though she had been pushed there.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘He’s been at me,’ Mrs. Gibson said, ‘about the
Riddings. He’s just this minute left me. It’s either them
or him, he says. What d’you think of that? I’m sorry to
say it, but I call it unkind, unkind to me and to those
poor things down there. Now, what would you do yourself,
Miss Mole, dear? Would you turn them out? No,
I know you wouldn’t. Stand-offish as she is, considering
everything, if you know what I mean, I can’t help feeling
I’ve got a duty by her. I can keep my eye on her. And
there’s that baby. I never had one of my own and, if you
ask me, the motherly ones are those that never had any.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah,’ said Hannah weightily. Her thoughts, straying
from Mrs. Gibson’s problem, were pursuing this idea.
She had believed it was her own and she was surprised
to find that it was also Mrs. Gibson’s. ‘But you had a
husband,’ she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, of course, dear. And I was a good wife to him.
Those are his own words.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I was wondering,’ Hannah said, ‘if the best wives are
the ones who are not married.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, my dear, I don’t hold with that kind of thing!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Hannah was trying to find proofs for her theory
that non-realization was the highest good.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t mean what you mean,’ she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m glad of that,’ said Mrs. Gibson. ‘There’s too
much of that kind of thing nowadays—so I’m told.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Dreadful, isn’t it?’ Hannah murmured back.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And anyhow, there’s no question of that here, I’m
thankful to say, but he tells me there’ll be trouble again;
he says he doesn’t feel the same about the place. He says
he needs quiet after his day’s work.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah made a loud, derisive noise. ‘Work! Chasing
money with a little shovel! It’s like playing tiddleywinks!
And quiet!’ She held up a hand. ‘Listen, Mrs. Gibson.
There’s not a sound.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Gibson nodded complaisantly. ‘A well-built
house. I don’t know where he’d find a better. And then,
you see, I knew his ma. At the sewing-meeting. I don’t
go now, dear. I’ve enough to do with the mending at
home and Mr. Blenkinsop’s very hard on his socks, but
in the old days, with Mrs. Blenkinsop and Mrs. Corder,
I went. And now she’s passed away and little did I
think then I’d ever have her son for a lodger. She was a
gloomy woman, I must say, but all the same, there it is.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And Mrs. Corder—what’s she like?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Dead, too, dear. Yes. Pneumonia. It’s a terrible
thing. Here to-day and gone to-morrow. Only ill for a
week. Poor man! I’ll never forget the funeral.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Now Hannah made a vague sound of sympathy. ‘A
loss to the chapel,’ she suggested.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well’—Mrs. Gibson, who had been growing drowsy over
the fire and her reminiscences, tried to sit more upright
and her voice was almost a whisper,—‘well, I don’t know
about that. People used to say things. She was never at the
Sunday evening service, and that didn’t look well, did it?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Tired of hearing him talk, perhaps.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That might have been it,’ Mrs. Gibson said with
unexpected tolerance. ‘A wife feels different to anybody
else. But at the sewing-meeting, now and then, she’d be
funny rather. Absent-minded,’ she added, triumphant
at finding the right word.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Thinking of him,’ Hannah suggested again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah, now, you can’t have it both ways!’ Mrs. Gibson
cried cunningly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, but you can think in heaps of them,’ Hannah
said, and she gave her nose the twist which could mean
disgust or a bitter kind of satisfaction.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Gibson wisely ignored these possibilities. ‘And
then, he’d come in and give us a look round, as cheery as
you could want.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I know,’ said Hannah.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And laugh! He was full of his jokes.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I know,’ Hannah repeated grimly. How was she going
to meet those jokes, or were they less frequent in the
family circle? She was convinced that his wife had hated
him, and while Mrs. Gibson rambled on, Hannah was
either gazing into a future full of dislike for that hearty
man or reconstructing the married misery of Mrs. Corder.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘How I’ve been talking!’ Mrs. Gibson said at last. ‘And
you haven’t told me what I’m to do about Mr. Blenkinsop.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Tell him he ought to be ashamed of himself,’ Hannah
said, rising from the hearthrug, and she went away,
leaving Mrs. Gibson disappointed, for the first time, in
the resourcefulness of Miss Mole.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER VI</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Beresford Road and Prince’s Road meet at a point just
below Albert Square, and as they are both on the western
side of Nunnery Road, where the tramcars go up to the
Downs and down to the city, they can claim to be in
Upper Radstowe, but, except for that terraced row of
houses on one side of what the errand boys call Prince’s,
they might belong to any other mid-Victorian suburb.
The houses in Beresford Road are just emerging from
the basement era. Their kitchens are still a few steps
below the level of the sitting-rooms, but they have been
raised from the cellarage whence a sturdier, or dumber,
race of servants was content to ascend a long flight of
stairs an innumerable number of times a day. Some of
the houses are surrounded by their own gardens; others
look like one house and are really two, with their entrances
deceptively placed at the side; they give, and want to
give, the impression that nothing unusual or indecorous
can happen within their walls, and the red bulk of Beresford
Road Congregational Chapel proclaims that Nonconformity
has been received into the bosom of respectability.
Perhaps the great days of the chapel are over.
It was built for the benefit of those rising families whose
incomes permitted a removal to this part of Radstowe
and whose religious convictions had not changed with
their fortunes; at a time when there was still something
faintly defiant in marching a large, decently clad family
to chapel in the face of church-goers who had never dared
anything for freedom, but now that the church had
amiably acknowledged dissenters as men and brothers,
the only flavour left in Nonconformity was the unpleasant
knowledge that its supporters were still considered socially
doubtful. Big families were now out of fashion: many of
those girls and boys who had regarded Sundays as half
festival, half penance, who had been glad to wear their
best clothes over the prickly discomfort of their clean
under garments, and to watch their acquaintances through
the boredom of the services, had moved on to what was
called a better part of Upper Radstowe, reared two or
three children and quietly seceded from the faith of their
fathers. The bolder spirits, who still went anywhere,
went to the Unitarian Church, but Upper Radstowe was
not the right soil for Nonconformity, which flourished
more abundantly on the other side of Nunnery Road,
and the appointment of Robert Corder to Beresford
Road Chapel, fifteen years ago, had been an attempt to
stir the sluggish ground with the chemical of a vigorous
personality. His predecessor had been a gentle old man
who preached patiently to the shining empty pews and
could not be expected to lure young people to hear him,
while Robert Corder was a bold, upstanding figure and the
sight and sound of him advertised the vitality of his
faith. He could be seen, striding about the streets,
leaping on to moving tramcars and off them, rushing to
and from committee meetings, always in a hurry, yet
always willing to check his speed for a few words with
his acquaintances, and these words were cheery, optimistic
and delivered in a loud voice, unless a quieter
sympathy was called for. A member of his chapel
brought him to a halt; a deacon could divert him from his
course, and then he would stride on, still faster, making up
for time which, as he often and merrily told these waylayers,
was not lost, but had gone, before he knew it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>These were habits and occupations with which Miss
Mole was not yet acquainted. From the window of her
bed-sitting room she could see the roof of the chapel and
she had noticed it as a warm patch of red among the other
roofs and the trees. She was a specialist in roofs and
from many high windows in Upper Radstowe they could
be seen in every shape and colour. They slid down the
steep slope to Lower Radstowe, red, grey, blue and green,
and spread like a flower garden over the city. There were
old red tiles in close neighbourhood to shining slates,
there were mossy green roofs squeezed between the walls
of higher houses and, with all these variations in height,
there were trees overtopping chimneys and chimneys
sending their smoke into other people’s windows, but
this could not be seen from Hannah’s room. Her view
of the newer part of Upper Radstowe was ordinary
enough, and she had made the most of the chapel roof
until it had suddenly changed into a portent. She liked
it no longer, yet she looked at it more often: she imagined
herself sitting under it, a small drab speck against the
varnish, and, during the days which passed before she
heard from Lilla, she spent some time in Beresford Road,
feeling like a conspirator or a private detective. She
tried to get into the chapel and found, as she expected,
that the doors were locked. ‘This,’ she said, addressing
the ivy which grew round the porch, ‘is enough to drive
anybody to Rome, and I’ve a good mind to go there.
I suppose the place is so ugly that they daren’t let anyone
see it unless there’s one of their entertainments going
on, and then they’ve got each other’s hats to look at.
Not,’ she added, ‘that there can be anything much in
the way of hats.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>She would have been very gloomy if she had not been
enjoying her prejudices and her prophetic powers. She
was sure the red roof was painted blue on the inside, like
the firmament, and sprinkled with opaque golden stars:
she had seen Mr. Corder’s house, No. 14—a long
stone’s throw from the chapel and on the other side of
the road—and her forebodings had been justified. It was
one of the coupled houses, with an asphalt path running
up to the inconspicuous door. There were a bow and a
flat window on each of two floors and a small one, like
an eye, in the gable. Hannah had strolled past the house
adventurously: at any moment Mr. Corder might appear
and it would be hard to look like a woman with a right to be
in the road. She was not curious about him: it was the
house she was concerned with, and if she could put her
head inside its door she would know, at once, whether
she could be happy in it. That, however, was further
than she dared to go and she had to content herself with an
external view, finding nothing hopeful in the lace curtains
and the plot of grass edged with laurels and confined by
iron railings. The architect of that house had been no
artist. It was an ugly house, yet its twin, next door,
looked infinitely more habitable, though the Venetian
blinds were askew. Dusty-looking red curtains, clasped
by brass chains, draped the lower bow window and a
bird-cage containing a canary reminded Hannah painfully
of Mrs. Widdows. No. 16 was quite as unattractive
as No. 14 to the eye, but Hannah would have felt happier
if the red curtains had belonged to Mr. Corder.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She was startled, the next morning, when she passed
again, to hear a harsh voice bidding her good-day and,
standing on tip-toe to peer over the privet hedge which
grew above No. 16’s railings, she saw a parrot in a cage
in the middle of the grass plot. The bird leered at her
for an instant and then with an insulting expression,
pretended it had never seen her, though she offered it
the usual complimentary remarks.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Fond of birds?’ asked another voice, and a face popped
over the privet hedge, close to her own. ‘Picking up the
dead leaves,’ said its owner, showing her a handful, ‘and
giving Poll an airing at the same time. Can’t let him out
alone, ’cos of the cats. Even my own cats. Jealousy,
I suppose. Now you’ll tell me that a bird is always a bird
to a cat—and they’d eat Minnie, that’s the canary, there,
if they could get her, I haven’t a doubt, but—and I’ve
made a study of this—it’s not food they’re after with
Poll. It’s the human voice that upsets them and he’s
remarkably chatty at times. The human voice, coming
from the wrong place. It’s natural, when you come to
think of it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Mole had discovered why No. 16 was a fitter
habitation for her than No. 14. She recognised something
native to herself in this elderly man who could fall
into conversation with a stranger, something congenial
in his battered old face and his roguish, disrespectful eye.
As much as she could see of him was arrayed in a sleeved
woollen waistcoat, a high, stiff collar, and a red tie pierced
by a pin with a diamond and opal horseshoe head, and
he had the look of a man who would wear his cap in the
house.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That’s very interesting,’ she said, dropping back on
to her heels, while he pressed closer to the hedge to get
a better sight of her, and his humorous, rather watery
eyes seemed to be comparing her unfavourably with all
the fine-looking women they had rested on.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Saw you yesterday, didn’t I?’ he asked. ‘Shaving at
the time, up there,’ he jerked a thumb backwards, ‘and
saw a woman at the chapel door. “That’s a new thing,”
I said to myself. Couldn’t make it out at all, so I kept
my eye on you. Seemed funny to me.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It would have been funnier if I’d got in,’ Hannah said
with a sniff.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah, not my idea of fun, but if you want to get in,’ he
jerked his thumb sideways and his tone made large
allowances for human vagaries, ‘you’ll get the key, I
dessay, next door. Parson lives there. Went out half an
hour ago with his coat tails flying. Pretended he didn’t
see me,’ he gave Hannah a slow wink, ‘but I could tell
him a thing or two if I liked. Only, as it happens,’ he
sank out of sight and his voice came muffled through
the hedge, ‘I don’t like.’ She could hear him gathering
up more leaves.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A farewell seemed unnecessary, to go without one
seemed rude, and she murmured something to which he
made no response, but he had brightened her outlook;
to live next door to a man who could tell Robert Corder
a thing or two, to discover what those things were, would
be an alleviation of the dreariness she anticipated, and
when she opened Lilla’s letter with the news that Mrs.
Spenser-Smith had had her way and that Miss Mole
would be expected in Beresford Road on the Tuesday of
next week, Hannah could think more lightly of her
bondage and face the fact that there were not many
pounds left in her purse, but she made a wry face at
Lilla’s much-underlined conclusion in which she pointed
out that with fifty pounds a year, her board and lodging
and the rent from her house in the country, Hannah
would surely be able to lay something by for a rainy
day.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘About enough to buy a cheap umbrella,’ Hannah said,
flipping the letter across the table before she tore it into
little pieces in carefulness that the secret of her relationship
to Lilla should be kept.</p>

<p class='pindent'>For Mrs. Gibson, the next few days had a noble sadness
in them. She was to lose Miss Mole but could not grudge
her to the exalted state of being housekeeper to Mr.
Corder, and Miss Mole knew she would be welcome at
any time if she liked to drop in for a cup of tea. Mrs.
Gibson gazed admiringly at this woman who had appeared
out of nowhere to save Mr. Ridding’s life, to keep out
the policeman and avert an inquest and who betrayed no
nervousness at the prospect of living with a minister,
a man whose jokes, as Mrs. Gibson recognised, were
comparable to passing froth on a pool of unknown depth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah’s own sadness was shot with a sense of adventure.
She was prepared for every kind of dullness and
annoyance, she was prepared to be sent adrift again on a
world that did not want her, but her belief in approaching
good was irrepressible: there was the man next door with
his cats and his parrot and his canary and, for all she
knew, he might be the one who was to leave her a fortune;
there would be the fun of watching Lilla’s secret anxiety
and careful condescension, and she was in the place she
loved with the chance, if she behaved herself, of finding
primroses on the other side of the river, in the spring.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Yet she wished she could have had a little longer with
Mrs. Gibson, for Mrs. Ridding was still unfriendly and
Mr. Blenkinsop was still the fortified place she had left
behind her. She understood the nature of Mrs. Ridding’s
defences and respected them, but she itched to tease
Mr. Blenkinsop with feints of attack. In daily expectation
of another ultimatum, Mrs. Gibson was treating him as
though he were seriously ill: she whispered if she encountered
Hannah on the landing outside his rooms, took
special pains with the cooking of his food and carried it
to him herself lest the blundering of the little servant
should distress him, and this both angered Hannah and
gave her the opportunity she wanted.</p>

<p class='pindent'>On her last evening, she went into the kitchen and
picked up the tray.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘He won’t like it!’ Mrs. Gibson gasped.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘He’ll have to lump it,’ Hannah said vulgarly. ‘What
about your poor legs, as you call them?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>There were no limits to Miss Mole’s audacity: Mrs.
Gibson could not cope with it and she looked at Hannah
with the mournful, helpless interest she had once experienced
when she saw a man go into a cage of lions.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Blenkinsop was sitting by the fire in a large sitting-room
heavily furnished with his mother’s mahogany.
In front of him was a chessboard on a stool and his hand
was poised above one of the pieces. He did not look up
and Hannah felt as if she had carelessly entered a church
while a service was in progress. The proper thing was to
slip away and trust the appetising smell of cooked meats
to creep through Mr. Blenkinsop’s absorption, but,
instead of doing that, she said crisply, ‘Dinner is served,
sir!’ and taking a step forward, she added, ‘So that’s
what you do in the evenings! It must be a great resource.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Blenkinsop looked astonished and then frowned.
‘It needs concentration,’ he said pointedly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That’s what I mean,’ Hannah replied obtusely. ‘I’ve
brought up your dinner because Mrs. Gibson’s legs ache.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘There’s no reason why Mrs. Gibson should do it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Fear,’ said Hannah, ‘is one of the strongest human
emotions.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m afraid I don’t follow you,’ Mr. Blenkinsop said
with marked politeness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘The poor dear is afraid of losing you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘She knows how to keep me.’ Mr. Blenkinsop took his
seat at the table and unfolded his napkin. ‘And really,’
he went on, indignation mastering courtesy, ‘I don’t
quite understand why you should interest yourself in the
question.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, you don’t understand,’ Hannah said gently. ‘And
I make no apology. I’m speaking, as it were, from my
deathbed. <span class='it'>Moriturus te saluto!</span> To-morrow, you’ll be glad
to know, I’m moving on. I’m going to live with Mr.
Corder—as his housekeeper—oh Lord!’ A faint gleam
of interest passed across Mr. Blenkinsop’s face and she
took advantage of it. ‘Yes, think of that!’ she cried, ‘I’d
rather live with the Riddings. Why don’t you teach Mr.
Ridding to play chess? That would keep him out of the
oven! And what an inconvenience for you to find new
lodgings! And Mrs. Gibson’s heart will break! Stay
where you are, Mr. Blenkinsop, and think of me to-morrow
at this time, when you’re here in your comfortable
room and I’m in a strange land. But perhaps I shall see
you sometimes at the chapel. That will cheer me up.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not very likely,’ Mr. Blenkinsop said, firmly nipping
this bud of hope, and he applied himself to his dinner
with an unmistakable air of dismissal.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER VII</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Gibson’s greengrocer undertook to deliver Miss
Mole’s box at the house in Beresford Road and thither,
in the dusk, Miss Mole walked, following the cart and
feeling that this was her own funeral and she the solitary
mourner. Slowly the cart creaked down the road and
slowly Miss Mole walked after it, and it seemed to her
that her old trunk was her coffin and that the solitary
mourner was her own ghost. A little wind was driving
the fallen leaves along the pavement, there was a rustling
of the bushes in the gardens, the tired pony’s steps and
the turning of the wheels were dismal sounds, and she
wished she had gone to the expense of hiring a cab and
arriving with some appearance of eagerness. This was a
very melancholy procession, a detachment of an army of
women like herself who went from house to house behind
their boxes, a sad multitude of women with carefully
pleasant faces, hiding their ailments, lowering their ages
and thankfully accepting less than they earned. What
became of them all? What was to become of herself?
Age was creeping on her all the time and she had saved
nothing, she would soon be told she was too old for this
post or that, and, for a second, fear took hold of her with
a cold hand and the whispering of the dead leaves warned
her that, like them, she would be swept into the gutter
and no one would ask where she had gone, and her fear
changed into a craving that there should be at least one
person to whom her disappearance would be a calamity.
‘No one!’ the leaves whispered maliciously, while a
little gust of laughter came from the bushes, and at that,
Hannah paused and looked disdainfully in their direction.
She was not to be laughed at! She was not to be laughed
at and she refused to be frightened! Her head went up
and she walked more quickly, to get level with the cart,
and the ruby glow in No. 16’s bow window applauded her
spirit. It was pleasant to think he was in there by the fire
with the parrot and the canary and the cats. He would
be surprised when he saw her flicking a duster from a
window of No. 14, and Hannah liked surprising people.
This was something to look forward to and she was not
depressed when she saw no welcoming lights shining
from Mr. Corder’s house.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The greengrocer shouldered the box, Hannah followed
him up the asphalt path and rang the bell. There was
a glimmer of light in the hall, but no one could be heard
stirring in the house.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Seems as if they’re all out,’ the greengrocer said, and
whistled under his breath.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah rang the bell more loudly, the greengrocer
cocked his head with polite attention, and now they heard
the sound of someone running down the stairs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Half an hour later, when Hannah was kneeling in
front of her box, she fancied she could still hear that
sound. It had struck her ear, at her first hearing of it,
with a strange significance, as though Fate itself were
coming to let her in, yet when the door was opened it
revealed no more than the figure of a small, thin girl who
did not know how to greet a stranger or to apologize for
the necessary absence of her elders and the neglect of
the servant who should have answered the door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah made a mental note about that servant and
another that this girl, who must be the one who had holes
in her stockings, was not at all pleased to see her, and she
answered reserve with reserve, but when the greengrocer
had struggled upstairs with the trunk and Ruth had found
a box of matches and lighted the gas in Miss Mole’s
attic bedroom and, doing her best, had gone to the window
to pull down the blind, Hannah forgot to be dignified
and called out, ‘Oh, don’t do that! I want to look. It
faces nearly south, doesn’t it?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was a dormer window, the one she had seen from
the road, and she felt like a pigeon peering from a hole
in a dovecot. The house was set higher than she had
thought and, over the opposite roofs, she could see
thousands of twinkling lights and the dim outline of more
roofs and chimneys. And this was a view which would
be no less lovely in the morning, when the spires and
towers of Radstowe’s innumerable churches and the
factory chimneys with their pennons of smoke would
clear themselves from the wide-spread huddle of buildings.
She turned her head a little to the right and the wind
came straight across the hills from the place where her
pink cottage stood in its little orchard, and it was characteristic
of Hannah to accept the pleasure and ignore
the pain of the wind’s reminders, to overpay the greengrocer
and to smile as she told Ruth she was going to
unpack.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Cheerfully she looked about her when she was left
alone and she decided that she liked this narrow room
with its sloping walls, and then, with the wariness of an
old campaigner, she examined the blankets, which were
clean, and the sheets, which were rather coarse, and
thumped the mattress critically.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Lumpy,’ she said, frowning a little. But never mind!
She had the view from the window, she thought she would
be able to hear the ships hooting up and down the river,
and not far away there was the real Upper Radstowe with
its old streets and crescents, its odd passages and flights
of steps, and she unstrapped her box, forgetting she had
seen it as a coffin.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The size of the box erroneously suggested that Miss
Mole’s wardrobe was extensive. There was still plenty of
room in drawers and cupboards when she had laid out and
hung up her clothes, and there was still a good deal left
in the box, for Miss Mole’s treasures travelled with her
and the chief of these was the model of a sailing ship
miraculously enclosed in a pale green bottle. She took
it from its wrapping of cotton wool and gazed at it tenderly
when she had put it on the narrow mantelpiece. She
liked to see it sailing all alone, never getting any further
and never losing its gallantness, and it brought back
memories of her very early childhood when it stood on
the parlour mantelpiece, far out of her reach, a mystery
in itself and a hint of greater mysteries. It was connected
with the few sights, sounds and smells that remained to
her of those days; heavy bees buzzing among the pinks
on a hot afternoon, a turn in the garden path where
danger lurked behind the hedge of box, the crackling of
her starched pinafore, the rattling of milk pails and the
creaking of her father’s corded breeches.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She had a lot to be thankful for, she thought. It was
good to have such clean country memories and it was
astonishing how solid a background they made to life.
Consciously or unconsciously, they were there, and,
however murky and sordid some of her experiences had
been, her roots were in wholesome earth and she had
sprouted among sweet-smelling things. No one loved
streets better than Hannah Mole, but she had a secret
satisfaction in her knowledge of matters on which these
townspeople depended and which they took for granted,
and it gave her a feeling of permanency, of something more
real than anything else in her restless flittings about the
world and her changing views of what she was or might
have been.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She had finished dressing herself for the latest part
she had undertaken when a knock came at the door and
the thin little girl appeared again, evidently unwilling to
be the messenger who summoned Miss Mole to supper.
She was a little breathless, but whether with nervousness,
indignation or the ascent of the stairs, Hannah did not
know.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘She wants feeding up,’ she thought, as she smiled
with determined brightness, and she promised herself
that the day would come when this child would be glad
of an excuse to knock at Miss Mole’s door. Even now her
eyes had lighted on the bottled ship with a quickly hidden
interest, and of that, too, Hannah made a mental note.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her bedroom had been a pleasant surprise; the rest
of the house was what she had known it must be. The
hall smelt faintly of the morning’s cooking, the gas was
protected by a lantern of red and blue glass, and though,
when she entered the dining-room, she missed the green
serge cover on a table which was laid for supper, the
rusty fern was there, under a three-armed chandelier.
One of these arms was fitted for incandescent gas which
bubbled inside a frosted globe; the others were neglected
and stood out gauntly like withered branches on a tree,
but the room was further illuminated—though it still
seemed rather dark—by an ordinary gas jet on each side
of the fireplace, and these flames gently hissed in their
globes of pink and white.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She noticed these things with a glance of her practised
eye, and she had no time to verify her suspicion that
there was cold mutton on the table before her hand was
seized by a young woman who pranced to meet her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In her nervous or happy moments, prancing was
Ethel Corder’s gait and, indeed, she reminded Hannah
of an awkward-tempered colt. There was a display of
teeth and eyeballs, a look of half-playful viciousness for
which her physical peculiarities were chiefly responsible.
Her pale, scanty hair started growing too far back and
there was a deficiency of eyebrow, yet her plainness had
a certain feverish quality which attracted and held the
attention.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Someone’s been knocking her about in the stable or
stealing her oats,’ Hannah thought, while Ethel volubly
explained that an emergency committee meeting had
engaged her father and herself. ‘I shall have to be careful.
And the little one looks like a starved donkey. It’s lucky
I was brought up on a farm.’ She wanted to stroke and
reassure them both, to tell them she could make them
plump and happy if they would trust her. She wanted
to stop the gas from bubbling like a turkey and hissing
like a pair of geese. She saw there was plenty here for a
farmer’s daughter to do, and though this might not be
the place Hannah Mole would have chosen for herself,
it was the one that needed Hannah, and she was turning
the cold mutton into a savoury hash for to-morrow’s
dinner and getting rid of the rusty fern, when the voice
which had cheered many a sewing-meeting bade her
good evening.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘So this is Miss Mole,’ he said, nicely fitting his tone
to the one suitable for an emissary of Mrs. Spenser-Smith
who was far from being Mrs. Spenser-Smith herself,
and Hannah, prejudiced already, thought she saw him
quickly appraising her as a useful nobody.</p>

<p class='pindent'>With the best will in the world it was impossible to
think the same of him. His height, his handsome head
of dark chestnut hair just flecked with grey, the pointed
beard of a lighter colour, his suggestion of great physical
energy, dominated the room, and with a stiffened back,
but a crestfallen spirit, Hannah had to admit that Mr.
Corder, too, was something of a surprise.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Meekly, she took her seat opposite to Ruth, the servant
brought in a dish of damp potatoes, and Mr. Corder took
up the carving knife and fork. Ethel had fallen silent and
Ruth seemed determined not to speak. She looked
crossly at the mutton on her plate and at Miss Mole
on the other side of the table, but she bent industriously
over her food when her father began to talk.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘This is a fine old city, Miss Mole,’ he said, ‘full of
historic associations, and we have one of the finest parish
churches in the country—if you are interested in architecture,’
he added, with a subtle suggestion that this was
not likely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah longed to ask what effect her indifference would
have on the building, but Mr. Corder did not wait for
reassurance about its safety.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ruth must take you to see it, some day. On a Saturday
afternoon, perhaps Ruthie?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I play hockey on Saturday afternoons,’ Ruth muttered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah, yes, of course, these games!’ Mr. Corder said
good-humouredly. ‘Well, Miss Mole may find her way
there herself. The Cathedral is not so good. I don’t care
about the Cathedral, but we are rather proud of our
Chapter House. It may surprise you—.’ He interrupted
himself. ‘By the way, what has happened to Wilfrid?
Wilfrid is my nephew and he is supposed to be studying
medicine at the University,’ he told Hannah. ‘Do you
know where he is, Ethel?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ethel’s eyes goggled nervously. ‘He had an engagement,’
she said in haste, and Hannah suspected that
Ruth’s smile had been calculated to make her sister
exclaim angrily, ‘It’s perfectly true, Ruth! He told me
about it yesterday.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And I knew he’d have it a week ago,’ Ruth retorted
coolly, and Hannah realised that this rude little girl was
hinting that her cousin had taken care to avoid Miss
Mole’s first evening.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Robert Corder lifted his eyebrows and managed to
look bland as he said, ‘I think Ruth shares my opinion
about the genuineness of Wilfrid’s engagements. However,
we need not waste our time over Wilfrid. I was saying,
Miss Mole, that you may be surprised at my interest in
ecclesiastical architecture, but whatever our religious
differences may be, these buildings are a common heritage,
and when I first came to Radstowe, fifteen years ago,
I made a point of seeing everything of interest or importance,
and very valuable the knowledge has been to me.
I have been able to wake a civic pride in a great many
people, I believe, but not, I’m afraid,’ he said playfully,
‘in my own children. You know the saying about the
prophet! I’m pretty sure Ruth has never been inside
St. Mary’s—eh, Ruthie?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth flushed an angry red and said she hated churches.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ruth is a stout Nonconformist, Miss Mole, but we
mustn’t be narrow. And there are other beauties in
Radstowe. “A thing of beauty is a joy for ever.” You
recognise that, Ruth, Ethel? And there are other interests.
Radstowe was once the most important port in England,
but with the increase in tonnage she has lost her place.
The big ships can’t get up the river. It is a tidal river—most
picturesque in its gorge—you must be sure to see
that, too—but the channel is very narrow, with large
deposits of mud.’ And at some length and with what
accuracy Hannah could not judge, he explained how these
deposits were made. ‘Dredging goes on, but does very
little good. It is a great misfortune for our trade.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ said Hannah, deciding to be dumb no longer as
she could not be deaf, ‘but it’s well worth it. At low tide
the mud is beautiful. All the colours of the rainbow, and
it makes such a nice promenade for the gulls.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Corder was like a horse bewildered by a check in
full gallop. ‘So you have seen our river?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh yes,’ Hannah said lightly, ‘I’ve known Radstowe
all my life.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah, really—’ said Mr. Corder and, suddenly, Radstowe
became of very little importance. ‘Ruth, will you ring
the bell. I think we are ready for the pudding.’</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER VIII</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Family loyalties and disloyalties are like currents in the
sea: they intermingle, jostle each other, change places and
are diverted or united according to the strength of the
obstacles they meet, and Hannah, sailing alone, like her
bottled ship, on this unknown ocean, found that her
little craft, which might be upset at any moment, was
quite robust enough to affect these currents. Ruth, undoubtedly,
had been embarrassed by her father’s instructive
monologue, but she could not tolerate his discomfiture
by a stranger, though the stranger’s intention might have
been innocent, and in the mild amiability she showed
him until the meal was over and the few remarks she
made to Ethel, who seemed to have missed what Ruth
resented, she proclaimed her allegiance to the Corder
clan.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her tongue was always Hannah’s danger and its
readiness had sometimes been her undoing. She could
control the expression of her face, but the temptation of
a quick reply or a disconcerting statement was too much
for her, and she would have been superhuman if she had
resisted this one and remarkably careless of her future if
she had not tried to disarm suspicion by a quietly sensible
demeanour while her duties were explained by Ethel and
they made a tour of the house together.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When they returned to the dining-room, Ruth had her
homework spread out on the green serge table cover, and
a young man, with his shoulders wedged under the
mantelpiece, was warming his back at the fire. He was
rather a beautiful young man, Hannah thought, as she
looked at his slenderness and the studied carelessness of
his dark hair, but one, she decided the next moment,
who would have to be kept in his place, for he was returning
her glance quizzically, and the lift of his eyebrows
condoled with her while his smile invited her to share his
amusement at the alien atmosphere in which he and she
found themselves. This was drawing a bow at a venture,
but he was safe enough, for if the arrow missed its mark
no one need know where he had aimed it, and Hannah’s
demure response to his greeting did not discountenance
him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ve been trying to make Ruth tell me about you,’ he
said gaily, ‘but she’s like David Balfour. She’s an awful
poor hand at a description.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I didn’t tell you a single thing!’ Ruth cried.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And now, methinks, you do protest too much.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I could tell you something about yourself! I knew
you’d begin showing off at once!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, no,’ Wilfrid protested genially. ‘I was only letting
Miss Mole know that this is a cultured household—as
indeed, it ought to be. We have <span class='it'>Familiar Quotations</span> on
our bookshelves and they save a deal of trouble and hard
work.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If you’re hinting that Father hasn’t read as much as
you have—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I didn’t mention the uncle, dear child,’ Wilfrid said
gently. ‘But all the same,’ he dropped his pose of an
ironical young man and became a natural one, ‘all the
same, I’ll bet you he hasn’t. Bet you anything you like.
I don’t blame him. He’s a busy man. He’s the kind of
man <span class='it'>Familiar Quotations</span> was made for, and he’d be a
fool if he didn’t take advantage of it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘He’s got more sense in his little finger—’ Ruth
began. She looked as if she was going to cry. ‘It’s you
that’s the fool! And I don’t know how I’m going to get
my homework finished with so many people in the room!
I shall have to do it in my bedroom. And I don’t care
if I do catch cold,’ she said, in answer to Ethel’s expostulations,
and from the door, she gave half a glance at
Hannah. ‘It won’t be my fault, anyhow.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ethel looked anxiously at Hannah. ‘I don’t know
what’s the matter with her,’ she said. ‘And I don’t
know what Miss Mole will think of us,’ she said to
Wilfrid.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, I don’t suppose we shall ever know that. Well,
I’m sorry I teased the child. Is the uncle in?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ Ethel was anxious again, ‘and I said you had an
engagement.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘So I had. An important committee meeting of the
Medical Students’ Temperance Society—if he wants to
know.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, Wilfrid! Really?’ Ethel clutched the blue beads
round her neck and smiled with an alarming joyfulness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wilfrid dropped his eyelids. ‘But if he doesn’t want to
know,’ he said drawlingly, ‘it wasn’t!’ and he slouched
gracefully out of the room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Dear me!’ Hannah said. They were the first words
she had spoken and she wished Wilfrid could have heard
them. It was the only possible comment and she
thought he would have appreciated it in her own sense.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ethel interpreted it as astonishment, and she hastened
to explain that Wilfrid was a dreadful tease but he did
not mean to be unkind. He did not realize how much
she was in earnest about temperance reform. Or perhaps
he did—what did Miss Mole think?—but liked to pretend
he could take nothing seriously. She wished he was not a
medical student. They were rather a wild lot, yet the
doctor’s was a noble profession and that of a medical
missionary was the best of all. She had wanted to be a
missionary herself—in China—but, when her mother
died, it seemed to be her duty to stay at home.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And now I’ve come, and if I turn out all right, perhaps
you’ll be able to go after all.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ethel gave what was equivalent to a violent shy,
keeping her eyes, meanwhile, on the object which had
alarmed her. ‘I don’t know,’ she said. ‘I do such a lot
for Father. And I have a Girls’ Club at the Mission. I’d
given up all idea of going away.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘The missionary field, as they call it, or the stage,’
Hannah said. ‘It’s generally one or the other, in one’s
teens, not that I ever fancied myself at either. But all
the world’s a stage, as you’ll find in <span class='it'>Familiar Quotations</span>.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And, in a way, a missionary field, too,’ Ethel said
eagerly. ‘And perhaps it’s really harder to stay at home.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I shouldn’t be surprised,’ Hannah said. ‘Oughtn’t
I to be darning, or something?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, not on your first evening, Miss Mole! The basket’s
in that cupboard and I’m afraid you’ll find a lot of socks
in it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘All the more reason for starting, then. And you said
Mr. Corder likes his tea at ten o’clock?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And biscuits.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And biscuits,’ Hannah repeated. ‘Keeps him awake,
I should think,’ she said, rummaging in the mending
basket. ‘Yes, there’s plenty to do here.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ethel shied again. ‘I’m always so busy,’ she said,
fidgeting with her beads, while Hannah thrust a thin,
probing hand into socks and stockings. ‘I’m so glad
you’ve come, Miss Mole, and I knew I should like anyone
recommended by Mrs. Spenser-Smith.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Did she choose the servant for you, too?’ Hannah
asked casually.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh no! She’s one of my girls. One of my club girls.
So she always has to go out on Wednesdays, Miss Mole.
That’s the Club social evening. And it’s the week-night
service at the chapel, so Father and Doris and I are all
out and we have to have a high tea that evening.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Sardines, I suppose?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not always,’ Ethel said simply, and Hannah, who had
been ready to suggest that these piles of mending should
be shared and Ethel’s restless hands employed, felt
herself softening towards this young woman who wanted
to approach and would be scared by a sudden movement.
She went on with her darning, behaving as she would
have behaved with the nervous colt, pretending she was
not watching it and letting it get used to her presence
before she advanced, and she could feel Ethel gaining
confidence though her fears kept jerking her back.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Aloud, she said cunningly, ‘I’m afraid I’ve frightened
everybody else away. Do you think your sister ought to
be sitting up there, in the cold?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ethel showed the whites of her eyes but, this time, she
did not jump. ‘I think we’d better leave her alone, Miss
Mole. Nobody knows how to manage her. Mother did.’
And now it was Ethel’s turn to look ready to cry. ‘And
she gets on with my brother—everyone does—but she
doesn’t seem to want me to be kind to her.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘She doesn’t look very strong.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps that’s it,’ Ethel said hopefully, and it occurred
to Hannah that here was another someone else who was not
happy unless everybody appreciated her, and this one had
less than common skill to evoke the admiration she wanted.
Hannah was inclined to think that this was a feminine
craving, the result of work in which the personal element
was supreme, but she was to learn that in this household
there was no one who was free from it. Robert Corder,
it was true, made no efforts: he had found they were
unnecessary and he accepted, as his due, the particular
kind of adulation given to a man in his position and was
astonished only if it was denied him, and when Hannah
had seen him in his chapel, after a service, petting, and
being petted by, a docile flock, it was easy to understand
why he treated her with marked coldness. She had
tripped him up on her first evening in his house, and while
his vanity and her appearance could persuade him that
this was an accident, he was careful not to get in her way
again. It was also easy to understand why Lilla had
introduced the watchdog. Miss Patsy Withers, a plump,
fading, but still comely blonde, would have made a
soothing companion for the Reverend Robert, a woman
who would always say what she meant and, still more
commendably, mean the thing most likely to please him,
and when Hannah dusted the large photograph of the
late Mrs. Corder which stood on the minister’s desk, she
wondered if that lady had ever puzzled her husband.
She looked capable of a silence which was certainly
not due to any lack of ideas, and the more Hannah
examined that face, the more she liked it, and the
more she was convinced that Lilla’s loyalty to the
dead was a romantic way of expressing her determination
to keep her own place as leading lady in the chapel.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It amused Hannah to see Lilla walking down the aisle
to her prominent pew, to meet her in the porch and
receive an appropriate bow and sometimes even a handshake,
and Hannah always took care to respond discreetly,
but with a glance or a pressure which brought a wary
look into Lilla’s eyes: It was hard to watch Ernest
taking round the offertory plate and not to smile at him:
it was harder not to encourage the kindness he was ready
to bestow on her. His greetings were a little too enthusiastic
to be those of her patroness’s husband but, in
the general cheerfulness of that porch and the heartiness
with which the sharers of a spiritual banquet mingled
before they separated for their more private and material
feasts, this brotherliness was not likely to attract attention.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Each Sunday morning, Hannah sat under the blue,
bespangled roof and she looked in vain for Mr. Blenkinsop.
She would get a series of nods from Mrs. Gibson, and
sometimes a whispered word, but their confidences were
exchanged when Hannah dropped in for the cup of tea
she had been promised, and she knew that Mr. Blenkinsop
was still in Prince’s Road and that no further misadventure
had disturbed his peace. Mrs. Gibson said it did her good
to see Hannah sitting in the minister’s pew, with Ruth
on one side of her and that handsome young man on the
other. She liked to see a young man at chapel. While
his mother was alive, Mr. Blenkinsop had been as regular
as anyone could wish, and now he only went occasionally
to the evening service, but, for all that, he was as steady
as he could be and she was not the one to judge people
entirely by their chapel-going.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, indeed,’ Hannah said seriously, ‘but I shouldn’t
enjoy the services so much if Mr. Corder’s nephew was
not there.’ She did not tell Mrs. Gibson how neatly he
sometimes paraphrased the hymns and sang them in her
ear, or how his elbow met hers during the sermon or
the extemporary prayers. Wilfrid was one of Hannah’s
many difficulties and few joys for, in the Corder household,
he alone flatteringly suspected something of her
quality and acknowledged it by paying her attentions she
did her best to repress, because, as she had early discovered,
to be favoured by Wilfrid was to irritate Ethel and to be
implicated in Ruth’s determined scorn of him. Ethel
was friendliness itself when no one else was troubling
about Miss Mole, but she was a bad sharer, in Hannah
as in Wilfrid, and when Ethel was upset Ruth seemed to
take pains to irritate her, while Wilfrid teased them both
in turn with bewilderingly quick changes. The truth
was that Ethel openly, and Ruth secretly admired, him for
his looks, his nonchalance, and his disregard for all they
had been taught to consider sacred, and Hannah was
mortified and amused to find herself in the same condition,
though her sight was clearer. Under his obvious
faults, he was a lovable young man, and for her what was
his most lovable quality was the quickness with which
he sought her eye when his uncle was at his most
ministerial, while those nudges of his elbow in chapel
was his indication that, in spite of all rebuffs, she could
not deceive him. She could pretend to be the plain Miss
Mole, keeping house for Mr. Corder, doing her work
efficiently, presenting an imperturbable obtuseness to
Ruth’s continued hostility, meeting Ethel’s gusts of
friendship quietly and ignoring signs of jealousy, letting
slip her opportunities to cap Wilfrid’s wit with her own,
but, so those nudges and those glances warned her, failing
to deceive him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This was heartening to Hannah. It lightened a task
which could only be done well if she persisted in seeing
it as a game in which Wilfrid’s appreciation and the
improvement in the meals were the only points she had
yet scored. She would score again when she had made
harmony out of these discords and when she had persuaded
Ruth that an interloper could be a friend, but she
had to play with a cautiousness which was alien to her
or lose the game.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Why did she take this trouble? she sometimes asked
herself. Was it for the sake of the game itself or in a belated
realization that, somehow, her future must be
assured, that with youth behind her she could not afford
more failures? She could not answer her own questions
but, day by day, as she dusted Mrs. Corder’s photograph,
she liked to fancy that between her and this woman
there was some sort of pact which she was trusted not to
break.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER IX</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>It was a long time since Hannah had lived with a family.
After an exhausting experience in which she had battled
with half-a-dozen riotous children, an ailing mother and
a father who tried to be confidential about the trials and
disappointments of marriage, she had taken a post with
an old lady in the hope of comparative leisure and, like
an actress who makes a success in a particular kind of
part and finds it difficult to get another, she had seemed
doomed to old, invalid and lonely ladies for the rest of
her life. She had naturally been suspected of inability
to deal with the young after an existence of picking up
dropped stitches, fetching clean pocket handkerchiefs
and reading aloud, though Hannah could have been
eloquent about the wearing nature of such work. Often,
she had looked at a charwoman with envy, desiring healthy
labour with brush and bucket, and for her folly in not
hiring a bedroom and letting herself out by the day, she
blamed what must have been an odd lingering desire
for the gentility she affected to despise. She would have
made an admirable charwoman: that vulgar strain in her
which Lilla justly deplored, so unsuitable in a companion
or a housekeeper, would have been a positive recommendation
in a charwoman, and she pictured herself,
going from house to house, energetic, good-humoured,
free of speech, the perfect charwoman of fiction, with a
home which was all her own and none of these tangled
personalities to deal with. Well, she would tell herself
with a sniff, she might come to it yet, but women in that
walk of life were not liable to be made the heirs of rich
old gentlemen, and towards that pleasant prospect Hannah
still pretended to be gazing. She had seen no one in the
chapel who answered to the description, and though she
had waved a duster out of every window, she had not
met No. 16’s roguish leer. A sparkling October had given
place to a damp November and the weather, she supposed,
was bad for parrots and for gardening. She sometimes
saw No. 16 trundling towards the back gate, she heard
him calling in the cats at night, but she had no time to
plan encounters, for she worked as hard as any charwoman
and had to adapt herself to new and difficult conditions.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In her other situations where there was a man of the
house, he had left it at a reasonable hour in the morning
and could be trusted not to reappear until the evening:
there was no such regularity in the movements of Mr.
Corder. The absence or presence of his hat and coat
was the only surety that he was out or in, and it became
a habit with Hannah to glance at the pegs as she went
through the hall and to feel her spirits rising or falling
with what she saw there, another unwilling confession
that his personality was not negligible. Hannah’s somewhat
toneless singing, which contrasted so strangely with
the quality of her speaking voice, was generally silenced
when he was in the house; he damped down the tempers
of his daughters and Hannah wondered if he knew they
had them; he stifled conversation, for he was ready with
information on all subjects, and opinions which differed
from his own either amused or angered him, yet hardly a
day passed without a caller, someone needing help or
advice, an ardent chapel worker with some difficulty to be
solved, a deacon on a mission of importance, and the voice
which came from the study was not always Robert
Corder’s, and though he might lead the laughter, there
was response to it, and people went away looking happier
than they had come. Nevertheless, Hannah would make a
grimace at the study door as she passed. She was sure Mrs.
Corder, from her place on the great man’s desk, was
listening gravely to what he said and making her acute,
silent comments, balancing the counsels he gave against
what she knew of him and yet, more tolerant than Hannah,
refusing to judge him harshly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She had made of Mrs. Corder a person like herself, with
more wisdom, more kindness and more patience, qualities
she must have needed in excess, Hannah thought grimly,
for she who prided herself on her willingness to accept
the good and bad in men and women as easily as she
accepted their physical and mental parts, was deliberately
antagonistic to Robert Corder. The swing of his
coat tails vexed her as probably the swing of her skirts
vexed him; she would not believe in the boasted broad-mindedness
of a man who sneered at opposing views or
waved them aside, and whose small, tight mouth she could
discern under the moustache which masked it. Like most
childless women, she exaggerated the joys and privileges
of possessing offspring and Robert Corder seemed
unaware of them. He was not an unkind father; he was
amiable enough and ready to expand under the affection
he had made it impossible for them to show him, but he
seemed to Hannah to treat his daughters as an audience
for his sentiments and the record of his doings and to
forget that these girls had characters, unless they happened
to annoy him. While Hannah chafed under his bland
assumptions, she enjoyed watching for corroborative
evidence of the estimate she had made of him and he
rarely disappointed her, for, when things went well with
him, he had to talk, and it was then that Wilfrid’s eyes
sought hers and with the tiniest droop of an eyelid, lift
of an eyebrow or face of unnatural solemnity, sent his
message to her across the table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah took a penitential pleasure in controlling herself.
If she asserted her personality before she had
established herself firmly, even Lilla’s patronage would
not save her. She had to persuade Robert Corder that
she was useful before she let him suspect her of a mind
quicker than his own, and she behaved discreetly, for she
had her compact with Mrs. Corder to keep, she had her
own powers to prove and, though she would have laughed
at the idea, she had the zeal of a reformer under her thin
crust of cynicism. She wanted to fatten Ruth and see
an occasional look of happiness on her face, to ease
Ethel’s restlessness and get some sort of beauty into the
house. She could not change the ugly furniture—and
there Mrs. Corder had badly failed—but friendliness and
humour and gaiety cost no money; they were, in fact, in
the penniless Hannah’s pocket, waiting for these difficult
people to take them, and Hannah bided their time and
her own.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She found that Ethel’s labours at the Mission were
not so arduous as the state of the house implied. She had
bursts of feverish activity, she was constant in her attendance
at the Girls’ Club and she sometimes helped her
father with his correspondence, and then, for a whole
day, it would seem she had nothing to do, and she would
shadow Hannah about the house, as though she dreaded
loneliness, watch her as she worked, without offering to
help, and spend the evening turning the pages of a book,
making fitful conversation, repairing, or making changes
in her rather tawdry clothes. She had a misguided
passion for colour and for ornaments, and the jingling of
her beads was the constant accompaniment to her restless
movements. Ruth, frowning over her lessons, would beg
her to be quiet and one night she asked why the drawing-room
fire should not be lit, so that Ethel and Miss Mole
could sit there and leave her in peace.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘We can’t afford a fire in every room in the house,’
Ethel explained.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Doris has one to herself, Father has another, why
should the rest of us have to share one? And anyhow, it’s
Miss Mole who manages the money now, so you needn’t
interfere!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Mole said nothing. This remark was probably
intended as a jeer at Ethel, but, at least, it recognised her
own existence, and a small smile must have come on her
lips, for Wilfrid, entering at that moment, gave a clap of
his hands and cried, ‘I’ve been wondering who you were
ever since the happy hour when I first saw you and I’ve
found out at last! Good evening, Mona Lisa. And don’t
pretend you don’t know it’s you I’m talking to!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah looked up, then down. ‘It’s the long nose,’
she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not a bit of it! It’s the secret smile. It’s all the wisdom
of the world.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ethel was at a loss and seemed distressed. Ruth glanced
up curiously for an instant and then bowed her head over
her books and shielded her face with her hands.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I can’t remember, for the moment,’ Ethel said, ‘who
Mona Lisa is.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘A plain woman,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then it’s very rude of Wilfrid,’ there was relief in
Ethel’s voice, ‘to say you’re like her.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘On the contrary,’ he said, ‘she may be plain, but she’s
the most fascinating woman in the world.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh!’ said Ethel blankly, and, after a moment’s fidgeting,
she went out of the room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wilfrid nodded towards the door. ‘She’s gone to look
her up in the dictionary!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, she hasn’t,’ Ruth spoke drily. ‘She’s gone up
to her room and she’ll be opening and shutting drawers
and banging things about for hours and I shan’t be able
to go to sleep.’ Her voice rose painfully. ‘Why haven’t
you more sense?’ she cried. ‘If you want to say things
like that, why can’t you say them when she isn’t here?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>For the first time in weeks, Hannah forgot to be on her
guard. A feeling of great mental weariness, of physical
sickness, overcame her. The work slipped from her hands
and she leaned back in her chair, shutting her eyes for a
minute. It seemed to her horrible that Ruth should have
so clear an insight into Ethel’s nature, and such bitter
experience of it, that Ethel’s nature should be what it
was. At Ruth’s age, Hannah had just gone to school in
Upper Radstowe, with an intimate, frank knowledge of
sexual processes, acquired by living on a farm, and was
discovering that matters which her father had not
scrupled to discuss in her presence were the subjects of
sly whisperings in the school. The shock she suffered was
different from the one to which Lilla piously laid claim,
for Lilla was disgusted by physical details and Hannah
was disgusted that anyone should consider them unclean,
and she had been spared Ruth’s irritating contact with a
mind subject, no doubt unconsciously, to the dictates
of the body.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The crudity of this thought was distasteful to Miss
Mole; the truth of it was worse. It was all very well to
talk about civilization’s benefits to women and the preservation
of their chastity, but what was happening to the
minds of countless virgins who would never be anything
else if they wished to be thought respectable? And while
Ruth, like Ethel, was probably in ignorance of causes,
she, too, was the unfortunate victim of effects.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah sighed, and raised her eyes to find Ruth looking
at her with a startled interest, and to wonder, under that
look, whether her policy of self-effacement was the right
one.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a fire in the drawing-room the next evening
and there was a feeling of holiday in the house. Robert
Corder was speaking at some meeting outside Radstowe
and would not be back that night, and Hannah prepared
a supper of surprises, such as they could not often have,
for he was a hearty eater and needed solid fare. The
family had the grace to recognise her efforts: Ethel
pathetically did her best to pretend she had no grudge
against Wilfrid or Miss Mole, Ruth openly enjoyed the
food, Wilfrid forebore to flatter or to tease, and Hannah
told herself that this was a very good imitation of a temporarily
happy family.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When the meal was over Ruth was left in the dining-room
to do her work, as she had desired, in peace, but
Hannah lingered to repair the fire and gather up the
mending which was her nightly occupation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Now you’ll be all right, won’t you?’ she said cheerfully.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth’s small, worried, face became more strained.
‘I didn’t say I wanted to be alone,’ she said, and Hannah
realized that her apparent sullenness was embarrassment.
‘I only wanted to be quiet. You sit so still. You’re not
like Ethel. And she’ll be happier, alone, in there with
Wilfrid.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And I’d rather stay here,’ said Hannah, and neither of
them spoke again until Ruth pushed her books aside and
said she was going to bed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Good night,’ Hannah said, with a cool nod and smile.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth stooped to the fire and warmed her hands and
then, with a little catch of her breath, she went away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I shall get her yet!’ Hannah said to herself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At some time during that night, she woke with a start.
She had been dreaming a variation of a dream she often
had. The scene was always the same. Somewhere in the
neighbourhood of her cottage, in one of the low-ceilinged
rooms or in the orchard, she was supremely happy, bewildered,
or in great distress, and to-night trouble had
been predominant. She thought the pain of it must
have waked her, or her own cry, but as she lay, trying to
compose herself, she heard a sound outside her door and
the turning of the handle.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Who is it?’ she said and, under the influence of her
dream, her voice was not quite steady.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s only me, Miss Mole. I thought I heard funny
noises.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah fumbled for the matches and lit the candle by
her bed. Ruth stood in the doorway, clad only in her
nightgown, with her feet bare, and in the uncertain light
she looked like a little wraith with frightened eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah swung herself out of bed. ‘Get in, quick!’
she cried. She threw the bedclothes over Ruth and put
on her own dressing-gown. ‘What is it?’ she asked briskly.
‘Burglars?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t know.’ Ruth’s teeth were chattering. ‘I’d
been dreaming.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah—so had I,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’d been dreaming—and I expect I’m being silly, but
I wish I needn’t sleep in that dressing-room. It’s bad
enough when Father’s there, but to-night his room was
so empty or so—or so full. And I couldn’t find the
matches to light the gas, and I thought I heard someone
moving, so I ran up here. I’m sorry, Miss Mole.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Don’t mention it!’ Hannah said, making a funny face
and sitting on the bed. ‘If it’s burglars, I propose to stay
here. No good interfering with them. Might cause bad
feeling. We’ll give them a few minutes to help themselves,
and when I think they’ve gone I’ll go and look for them.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth laughed, and it was the first time Hannah had
heard her do it naturally. ‘I don’t suppose it was burglars
at all. They wouldn’t come to a house like this, would
they? But I don’t want to go back to that room, Miss
Mole.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You shan’t. I’ll go. We don’t mind each other’s sheets,
do we? And you’ll feel happy up here, won’t you, with
my little ship on the mantelpiece, and you’ll go to sleep?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth nodded. ‘Where did you get your little ship?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Off the mantelpiece in my old home in the country.
I’ll tell you about it some day.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Whereabouts in the country?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Over the hills—but not very far away.’ She was silent
for a minute or two, looking down. ‘Well,’ she said,
‘I should think they’ve gone by this time. Good night.
Promise you’ll go to sleep.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Won’t you be frightened yourself?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not a bit. I met a burglar once and liked him. I’ll
tell you about that, too, in the daytime. I shall have
to put out the candle, you know.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I know. I don’t mind. Miss Mole—’ darkness made
this confession easier—‘I don’t believe I really believed
there were burglars at all.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No. It was a bad dream. I was having one myself.
I’m glad you woke me. I’ll buy some night-lights to-morrow.
The matches are never where you want them.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And they go out when you’re in a hurry. And Miss
Mole—’ this was still more difficult—‘you won’t tell
anybody, will you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But, of course I shall!’ Hannah said with a mocking
seriousness. ‘The first thing I shall do in the morning
is to tell Doris, then your sister, then your cousin, and
when your father comes home he shall hear all about it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth laughed again, a little ghostly sound, and Hannah,
as she went down the dark stairs, said to herself triumphantly,
‘I’ve got her now!’ but with her triumph a little
dismay was mixed. She knew the hampering nature of
possessions.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER X</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Seeing those two at breakfast, the next morning, no one
would have guessed that their relationships had changed.
Ruth was too shy, Hannah was too wily, and they were
both too cautious, to behave differently. Hannah did not
want to press her victory home. The enemy would
surrender unconditionally before long, and there was no
need to augment Ethel’s jealousy. In Ethel’s view,
Wilfrid, of course, had been talking nonsense when he
implied that Miss Mole was the most fascinating woman
in the world, but his nonsense usually had enough truth
in it to make it sting or soothe, and poor Ethel, who could
not hide her feelings, was hurt and puzzled. What made
a woman fascinating to Wilfrid? she seemed to ask, as
she looked from one to the other. To Ethel, at twenty-three,
Miss Mole was almost old and had certainly passed
the age when she could hope to be attractive. She was
not good-looking, yet when she was in the room Wilfrid
always watched her. Ethel liked Miss Mole and would
have liked her better if Wilfrid had not liked her at all:
she gave the house a feeling of safety: if it caught fire, if
anybody was ill, Miss Mole would know what to do, and
things had been more comfortable since she came.
Ethel was grateful for her freedom from the harassing
business of planning meals and trying to make Doris do
her duty without disturbing their common bond in the
Mission, and being reported as a stern mistress to other
members of the Girls’ Club. There was every reason why
Ethel should have been an inefficient housekeeper, and
every reason why Miss Mole should be a good one. At
forty, all distracting desires, ambitions, hopes and disappointments
must have passed away, leaving the mind
calm and satisfied with the affairs of every day, a state
for which Ethel sometimes envied Miss Mole, more
often pitied her, while always she tried to believe that
Wilfrid’s flattery was a new way of winning Ethel’s
attention to himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Naturally, no one saw Miss Mole when she was alone
in her dovecot and no one was privy to her sleeping or
her waking dreams. They were all too young or too self-absorbed
to understand that her life was as important
to her as theirs to them and had the same possibilities of
adventure and romance; that, with her, to accept the
present as the pattern of the future would have been to
die. This was the attitude of hope and not of discontent
and what Ethel saw as the resignation of middle-age was
the capacity to make drama out of humdrum things.
Here was a little society, in itself commonplace enough,
but a miniature of all societies, with the same
intrigues within and the same threatenings of danger from
outside. It had its acknowledged head in Robert Corder
who, sure of himself and his position, had no suspicion
that his rule was criticised by his second-in-command,
or that his subjects might rebel. In one of his public
speeches, or in a sermon, he would have described the
home just as Hannah saw it, as a small community in
which personalities were stronger than theories of conduct,
resilience more enduring than rigidity; he would
have said there was no life without change and struggle,
and, becoming metaphorical—Hannah enjoyed composing
sermons for him—he would have likened young people
to plants which must be given space and air, and their
elders to the wise gardeners who would not confine or
clip until the growth had attained a certain sturdiness,
and he would have meant everything he said, and believed
he followed his own counsels, but in his home he had
planted his seedlings within a narrow compass and
assumed that all was well with them. It was enough that
he had given them good ground and it was their privilege
and duty to prosper. He cast an eye on them, now and
then, saw they were still where he had put them, took
submission for content and closeness for companionship.
Doubtless, he wanted them to grow—Hannah gave him
credit for that—but he would have resented any divergence
from the shape he liked himself and though he
did not flourish his shears openly, everyone knew they
were in his pocket. There was a general conspiracy to
keep them there; and the struggles took place underground.
He was a busy man and he was not likely to
look for what was hidden.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Other people, as usual, knew more about his family
than he did, and he took his place at the supper-table one
evening, wearing an expression that boded trouble. He
always tried to translate his anger into grief and this
produced a look which demanded recognition, or threatened
to turn sour and, as it was better to meet him half-way
than to sit in an awed silence, Ethel asked anxiously if
he felt unwell.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If I did,’ he said, ‘I hope I should be able to hide it.
I have had a distressing experience. Two, in fact.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But it was the Education Committee Meeting this
evening, wasn’t it?’ Ethel asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Exactly,’ he said. He looked coldly at Wilfrid. ‘I want
to talk to you after supper. And as though one misfortune
were not enough, I met Samuel Blenkinsop on my way
home. I had not seen him since he gave his very dull
paper on Charles Lamb, and I must own that he had the
decency to seem embarrassed.’ He looked round the
table, waiting for his cue, but no one risked a question
or a comment. To ask why Mr. Blenkinsop looked
embarrassed would be to admit stupidity: a comment
made at this dangerous moment when some disaster was
hanging over Wilfrid’s handsome head, would certainly
be the wrong one, to be silent was almost an affront, and
if the younger people heard, in Hannah’s voice, a gallant
attempt to save the situation, she knew it herself as the
result of an irresistible curiosity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You mean,’ she suggested, ‘he was ashamed of his
paper. He’d been trying to forget it and when he saw
you the horror swooped on him. I know the feeling.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I mean nothing of the sort, Miss Mole.’ He paused
to look a little inquisitively, but more repressingly, at the
maker of this rather surprising speech. ‘He would be
fortunate if he had nothing else to be ashamed of.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Swiftly she had to readjust her view of that stolid
young man, working out chess problems in his quiet
room, and, before she knew it, she had said incredulously,
not unhopefully, ‘Has he robbed the bank?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>She was conscious, at once, of consternation in the
room, like a thin fog through which the familiar appeared
slightly distorted. With a stealthy movement, Wilfrid
had taken his handkerchief from his sleeve and was wiping
his nose very thoroughly and Ethel was looking from her
father to Miss Mole, uncertain and frightened of his
reaction, half-suspicious of her intention; the quick little
frown of Ruth’s anxieties had come and gone. Evidently,
this was considered a frivolous question to ask of a man
who was in earnest; it had a levity unsuitable in Miss
Mole and to the occasion and all she could do now was
to look enquiringly stupid.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Corder’s grief had been re-translated into an
astonished anger. ‘If that was meant to be humorous,
Miss Mole, I’m afraid it is not successful.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, no, it wasn’t!’ Hannah protested. ‘But—’ now
that she was attacked, she was at liberty to strike back
and there was a gurgle of laughter under her voice, ‘it
would have been funny if he’d really done it!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, Miss Mole!’ Ethel gasped.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Out of character,’ Miss Mole explained neatly, holding
up her small head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘So you are acquainted with Mr. Blenkinsop?’ Robert
Corder asked slowly, as though he were on the track
of a crime.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ve seen him—’ Hannah began, and Robert Corder
interrupted her with a betraying sharpness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not in the chapel!’ he said, and she knew it was only
pride that prevented him from asking the questions she
did not mean to answer.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She had had her little fling and it had done her good,
though she feared Wilfrid would suffer for it, and while
the interview in the study was taking place Ethel was
looking at her resentfully.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You shouldn’t make Father angry!’ she exclaimed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Did I?’ said Hannah. She was holding out a spoonful
of a treacly concoction of malt she had persuaded Ruth
to take and, under her little air of command, she was
afraid Ruth would refuse it, in token of loyalty to her
father. She was wonderfully relieved when Ruth docilely
put her lips to the spoon. ‘Good girl!’ she said. ‘I always
used to spit it out. Dozens of bottles were bought for
me and not a speck of it did I swallow. Kept it in my
mouth—and ran.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If Wilfrid gets into trouble with Father, he’ll be sent
home,’ Ethel mourned, ‘and he isn’t happy there. His
mother doesn’t understand him.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I shouldn’t think she understands anything—except
prayer meetings.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ruth! How can you be so naughty?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t care. She’s a horrible old woman and she
smells of camphor. All Father’s relations are horrible,
and Uncle Jim’s the only decent one we’ve got.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>This diverted Ethel. ‘Wouldn’t it be lovely if he came
for Christmas!’ she cried, but Ruth would never share
her raptures, and Ethel began pacing the room again in
her suspense.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wilfrid, however, returned cheerfully. ‘It’s all right!’
he said, ‘nothing worse than idleness. No lies necessary.
But it’s confoundedly awkward to have the uncle on all
these committees. He’d met the Dean—as well as Mr.
Blenkinsop. What’s old Blenkinsop done? You weren’t
tactful, Mona Lisa, but you were funny.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Was I?’ Hannah said. ‘It was Mr. Blenkinsop who
seemed funny to me—picking the locks, running off with
the bags of money—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But he hasn’t!’ Ethel exclaimed. ‘I don’t think you
ought to say such things.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If he had,’ said Hannah, solemnly, ‘I should be the
last person to breathe a word of it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then you’d be quite wrong!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Poor Ethel!’ Wilfrid said tenderly. ‘It’s no good
crossing swords with Mona Lisa.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’re all very unkind!’ Ethel cried. ‘Making fun of
everything, when Father’s so upset. You don’t know
how he feels it when anyone leaves the chapel. It’s like—like
a personal insult.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah, yes,’ Wilfrid said sympathetically, ‘he’d take it
like that, of course,’ and he looked at Hannah who was
cautiously unresponsive. ‘But is that all poor old Blenkinsop’s
done? Lucky fellar! Still, it’s a poor heart that
never rejoices and a dull one that doesn’t take the chance,
and I find the chapel distinctly entertaining. I love
hearing Mrs. Spenser-Smith telling everybody she’s got
a silk petticoat when she swishes down the aisle, and
seeing poor old Ernest’s agonies when the widows drop
their mites into the plate, and many a time I’ve seen
him slip past them before they could do it. I like old
Ernest.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I like them both,’ Ethel said, and, forgetting her
grievances, she added eagerly, ‘I wonder if they’ll have a
party this Christmas.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If they do,’ said Ruth, ‘I’m going to have a bad cold
in the head. I hate their parties.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And my duty to my mother will keep me at her side
during the festive season. Honestly, I’d rather see her
crying over the Christmas pudding and hear her telling
fibs about my father and wishing I were like him—and
we all know he was a bit of a scamp, and that’s why I hold
his memory dear—than go to one of those, you know
the word I want to use, Mona Lisa—well, one of those
parties.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Miss Mole won’t believe you. She knows Mrs.
Spenser-Smith.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I’ve never been to one of her parties,’ Hannah
said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I wonder if she’ll ask you!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I should hardly think so, and I should have to stay at
home and look after Ruth.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Which is far better,’ Wilfrid murmured. ‘Well, I’ve
promised to turn over a new leaf and I’m going to do it,
beside my cheery little gas fire, so farewell! But I’m
always forgetting to ask you something. Who makes my
bed?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I do,’ said Hannah.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then, what’s happened to my mattress?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It was there this morning.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I know it’s there, but it’s different. It’s lumpy.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘They get lumpy in time,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s done it in jolly quick time, then.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But it’s a new one!’ Ethel said. ‘It’s got a red and
fawn ticking, hasn’t it, Miss Mole?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Green,’ said Hannah. ‘Mine’s red and fawn.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then you’ve got the wrong one. We’ll have to change
them.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And give Mona Lisa the lumps! What are you talking
about?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ll go and look at them now,’ Ethel said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Miss Mole’s the housekeeper!’ Ruth cried hastily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I bought that mattress,’ Ethel said, going off with
a jingle.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘She’ll pull the bedclothes off and forget to put them
on again!’ Wilfrid exclaimed, going after her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Did you change them?’ Ruth asked softly, and Hannah
nodded. ‘I thought so!’ Ruth said with a chuckle.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XI</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>If Hannah had chosen to look for them, she could
have found as many reasons and excuses for Robert
Corder’s peculiarities as for those of Ethel and Ruth.
Robert Corder himself did not seek excuses; he saw his
troubles as the faults of other people and it did not
occur to him that the chief of his difficulties was that
he had been born too late. Thirty or forty years
earlier, he would have been a happier man. It would not
have been necessary, then, to make the mental compromises
he found so bewildering; he would have been
set firmly on the infallibility of his creed and his authority
as its exponent would have been unquestioned. Life
would have been simpler to direct and consequently
simpler to live. It was the knowledge that infallibility of
book, of man and of creed was increasingly denied, and
with a strength under which one must bend or break,
that took the full sweetness out of his position, and being
a man of great energy but no intellect, he felt bound to
give the appearance of keeping abreast of modern thought,
while his mind resented, and did not really make, the
effort. In the days when to doubt or to question was bad
manners, if it was not sin, his work would have offered
him everything he wanted, adulation, security of mind
and station and the loyal following of that army of men
and boys it had always been his ambition to lead. Self-confidence,
physical strength, a manly exterior were his,
but the army was merely a handful of old soldiers, suspicious
of changes, and raw recruits, and of this disappointment,
with its implication of failure in himself or
his teaching, his encounter with Samuel Blenkinsop had
reminded him. Those people in his chapel who kept
the old simplicity and to whom he was God’s vice-regent,
were his inferiors, as he knew too well: most of his flock
were his inferiors and this contributed to his comfort,
but a few were his equals in ability, if not in state, and
these accepted new ideas rather too quickly for the
Reverend Robert, who liked to point the way himself, or
else they took the Gospel with a literalness which was not
practical. If Mrs. Spenser-Smith had not been a level-headed
woman, her husband would have given all he
had to the poor, without considering their deserts.
Fortunately, Mrs. Spenser-Smith and the Reverend
Robert were of one mind about deserts, of which agreement
a luxurious armchair in his study and a son at
Oxford were proofs. There is no union, however, which
does not involve chafing at times, and the pride he took
in casually mentioning the son at Oxford was offset by
his annoyance that Howard should have a privilege his
father had missed and could have put to better use.
Undeniably, a part of Howard’s life was an unknown
world to Robert Corder, and while this did not prevent
him from criticism and informatory observations, it put
him at a disadvantage for which he blamed his benefactress
and subtly punished Howard.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And now Mrs. Spenser-Smith’s anxiety for the general
welfare of the family had brought Miss Mole into the
house.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He glanced with a frown, to which he quickly added
a sigh, at the handsomely framed photograph on his
desk, another of Mrs. Spenser-Smith’s gifts. He did not
like that representation of his wife. He preferred the
little one on his bedroom mantelpiece in which her soft
face looked at him hopefully above the stiff collar and tie,
and under the hard straw hat of her youth. It told him
that he was indeed the man he believed himself to be,
while this photograph, of a much later date, had suffered
some distortion of expression in the enlarging process on
which Mrs. Spenser-Smith had insisted. It vexed him
that people who had not known her should imagine that
faintly humorous, patient look was hers. Miss Mole,
for instance, must have received a false impression, if she
was capable of receiving any impression at all, and about
this Mr. Corder’s opinion wavered. She seemed stupid,
outside her sphere. She had been stupidly frivolous—or
was it merely tactless?—to-night, but he was disturbed
by her remark, ridiculous in itself, that it would be out
of Samuel Blenkinsop’s character to rob a bank. They
were unlikely words from the Miss Mole he knew and
they had been uttered with a crispness and an assurance
which, to quote her own expression, were out of character.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He turned to the letters on his desk. He was wasting
time over a matter to which he would not have given a
thought if Wilfrid’s idleness and Blenkinsop’s desertion
had not upset him. He was, of course, well abreast of his
times in his views about women, and it would have
horrified him to learn that he could not judge a clever or
a plain woman fairly. A clever one challenged him to a
combat in which he might not be the victor and a plain
one roused in him a primitive antagonism. In failing to
please him, a woman virtually denied her sex and became
offensive to those instincts which he did his best to
ignore.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His letters were soon answered. He might have prepared
a sermon, but he was in no mood for it. His interview
with the Dean rankled in his memory, his interview
with Wilfrid had not given him the satisfaction he expected.
Wilfrid, even when submissive, suggested an
amused superiority, impossible to notice and therefore
impossible to deal with. Samuel had been heavily
courteous, but uncommunicative, in reply to the rallying
reproaches with which Mr. Corder had met him. In these
days a young man showed no pleasure at being treated
as an equal, he seemed to expect it, and, after all, Mr.
Corder reflected, Blenkinsop must be well on in the
thirties. A different method might have been better, he
decided, and he had no desire to be another man’s conscience.
He had done his duty in the way of reminder,
but he was not a tradesman seeking custom, and that
brought his thoughts back to Wilfrid, his sister’s son.
She had made a marriage to which her father was opposed
and it had turned out badly, but the surprisingly snug
profits of the parental drapery business had been left to
her. The elder Corder had been just as strongly opposed
to Robert’s entering the ministry: to the small tradesman,
it seemed a costly business, with years of paying out
money for which he would get no return, and Robert,
as stubborn as his sister, had financed himself with immense
difficulty and labour and some timely help from
good Nonconformists who were attracted by the handsome,
eager young man. Robert Corder considered his
rebellion, unlike his sister’s, justified by its intention and
its results which his father had not had the generosity to
acknowledge, while he had rewarded her, who had merely
followed her inclination, and left her in a position to
pay her brother for his care of her son. Irritated that
he could not afford to get rid of Wilfrid and lose the
money, he took a turn up and down the room, glancing at
the clock. Ruth must have forgotten to say good night to
him. Hurt by his favourite daughter, angry with Wilfrid,
Blenkinsop and Miss Mole, he could not settle down to
read or to write, and Hannah, entering punctually with
the tea-tray, found him standing in front of the fire with
his hands in his pockets.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Always punctual!’ he said with deceptive cordiality.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I try to be,’ Hannah said modestly, putting down the
tray. ‘But what a miserable little fire!’ She knelt down to
replenish it. ‘Men,’ she said, as though to herself, while
she was busy with poker and tongs, ‘are chillier creatures
than women, but I’ve never met one yet who could keep
a fire in. There must be some reason for it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps we have other things to think of.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I hope so,’ said Hannah easily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He wished he had neglected her remark. He did not
want to make a precedent of this conversation, but he
could not let her have the last word. ‘And then, we pay
for the coal,’ he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Still on her knees, she turned and looked at him and,
suspecting a hint of amusement on her foreshortened
face, he went on, with authority. ‘And, in this household,
we have to be economical. I notice that, for some reason
or other, Ruth has a night-light in her bedroom.’ He was
glad to have a definite fault to find. ‘That seems to me
both pampering and wasteful. I don’t understand this
innovation. She has been used to going to sleep in the
dark.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ said Hannah quietly, ‘and waking up in it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And waking up in it—certainly,’ he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s not good for her,’ Hannah said, decidedly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He did not like her familiarity with his hearthrug.
‘Won’t you sit down?’ he asked. ‘I think we had better
discuss this matter.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ll just sweep up the hearth first,’ she said, and he
thought it was extraordinary that no woman could give
her whole attention to a subject.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But it appeared that Miss Mole had been thinking while
she swept, for when she had finished and sat down, she
said at once, ‘You have made me responsible for the
expenses of the house. If I keep within my allowance, as
I have done, so far, I don’t think it’s fair to criticize
details.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s not really a question of the money, Miss Mole,’
he said irritably. ‘It’s a question of training. I don’t
want Ruth encouraged in her nervousness. I hoped she
was growing out of it. Often, when—when her mother
was with us, she would come into our room and wake us,
saying she was frightened. What is she afraid of?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Bears, perhaps,’ Hannah said thoughtfully. ‘When
I was a child, I was troubled by a most persistent and
accomplished bear. And there was no way of escaping
him. He could climb perpendicular walls; he could
unlock doors. It’s no good pitting reason against things
that are not reasonable in themselves—like fears.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘So,’ he said, ‘you are a student of psychology!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah let that sneer pass. ‘Bears,’ she said, still in
her quiet tone and looking at the fire, ‘or wolves. There
was another time when I knew a wolf would catch me if
I wasn’t on a certain stair before my bedroom door
banged behind me. The wolf was half a game, but the
bear was a real bear.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But this is ridiculous, Miss Mole. You’re not going
to tell me Ruth fancies there are wild animals in her
bedroom!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘In the middle of the night? I could fancy it myself!
And Ruth’s young—and old—for her age.’ She looked
up at him. ‘What about ghosts?’ she asked. There was
another question on the tip of her tongue but, in loyalty
to Ruth, she would not ask it. Not once had Ruth spoken
of her mother, there was no photograph of her in the
dressing-room, and what Hannah wanted to know was
whether Ruth had loved or feared the dead woman who
had known, perhaps with love, perhaps with sternness,
how to manage her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ghosts!’ Robert Corder snorted. ‘I would rather it
was bears!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I expect she would, too,’ Hannah said promptly, and
stood up. ‘Bears or ghosts, the night-light will keep them
off.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m not satisfied about it,’ he said. Miss Mole was
taking too much for granted. ‘And Ruth knows I’m near
her.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah loosed her folded hands and raised her
shoulders. ‘You are the master of the house,’ she said,
quite unnecessarily, he thought, ‘but I ask you,’ her hands
came together again, ‘to let her have the night-light.
I warn you not to take it from her. Ruth isn’t strong, but
I can look after her if I’m given the chance.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That is partly what you are here for.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then give me the chance,’ she said, smiling, rather
startlingly, for the first time.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ll think it over,’ he said, turning towards his tea-tray.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Thank you,’ she said quietly, and he was vexed that
she should thank him. Had there been something ironical
in her tone?</p>

<p class='pindent'>He sat, stirring his tea, considering their conversation
and searching for offence in her share of it. She had been
a little too talkative with her stories of her childhood.
She was gaining confidence, he supposed, and might
prove to be one of those chattering women if she was
encouraged. Her hint of understanding Ruth better than
he did was annoying. But it was true that Ruth was not
strong. She caught cold easily—like her mother. He
would think it over, he told himself, but he knew
that Miss Mole would have her way. He was not
going to run a risk and be blamed if harm came of it,
and she might be right. Mrs. Spenser-Smith had spoken
of her experience. He felt puzzled about Miss Mole and
wished he had not mentioned money. Parsimony was
not one of his failings and it had been unfair to himself—the
result of his upsetting day—to talk as though it were.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XII</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth’s door was open when Hannah went up to bed and
there was no light in her room. Had Mr. Corder been up
and blown it out, in the cause of discipline? She was ready
to rush downstairs and upbraid him, when a sharp-whistled
note called her in.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I got into bed,’ Ruth said slowly, ‘and the matches
weren’t on the table so I couldn’t light the night-light
and I thought I’d wait till you came up.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If you got out of bed to open the door, why didn’t you
get the matches at the same time?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘The door wasn’t shut,’ Ruth said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I see,’ said Hannah. She admired the strategy and the
adroitness of Ruth’s explanation and she had to control
the gratified twitching of her lips as she lighted the
guardian lamp. ‘But, in future,’ she said severely, ‘I shall
light it myself when you go up to bed.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ten minutes after would be better. Then you can
turn out the gas, too. I don’t like turning out gas. I have
to get out of bed again to see if I’ve done it properly.
Several times. Did you do that?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘There was no gas in my home. Lamps downstairs,
candles upstairs. And on a very moony night, I didn’t
light my candle. We don’t pull down our bedroom blinds
in the country, and the lady could look in if she liked and
I could look out and see her trailing her skirts over the
tree-tops. And the owls used to hoot as she went by.’
She straightened the quilt over Ruth’s motionless little
body. ‘Go to sleep. Good night.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Just shut the door for a minute, please Miss Mole.’
Ruth said quickly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah obeyed, and as she turned back to the bed she
was thankful for the nights of her childhood in the bare
bedroom with the sloping roof and the open window free
of these lace curtains and Venetian blinds and she was
sorry for Ruth who was saying slowly, ‘I don’t believe
I’ve ever heard an owl.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not in Beresford Road, I’m afraid.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, not owls.’ She looked at Hannah as though she
meant to say something, and then decided to say something
else. ‘Do you go to your home when you have a
holiday?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It isn’t mine any longer. It was sold when my father
and mother died, twenty years ago.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Twenty years! Then,’ said Ruth, shutting her eyes
and creasing her forehead, ‘I suppose you’ve got used to
it by this time,’ and Hannah knew Ruth was thinking
about death and about her mother, and the question it
had been impossible to ask Robert Corder was answered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She felt a sharp pain in her throat, yet she could envy
Ruth a love which, in all probability had been without a
blemish. The memory of it was something to be cherished,
and such a memory had been denied to Hannah Mole.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She heaved a deep sigh. ‘I don’t think getting used to
things is the right way to deal with them,’ she said. ‘I
think—’ she was talking more to herself than to Ruth,
‘I think that’s wasting them. You’ve got to use them all
the time.’ She changed her tone and said cheerfully,
‘And I didn’t lose the whole of my home. I kept a tiny
bit of it, a little cottage and an orchard. I couldn’t bear
to let it go and that’s all I could afford to keep when
the debts were paid.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then you can go there, in your holidays, and hear the
owls again.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, no, I can’t very well,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Why not?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s let.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, I see. What a pity. But you get the money for it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That’s the idea,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth sighed regretfully. ‘I’d like to hear those owls,
Miss Mole—’ there was the pause Hannah was beginning
to know—‘do you like parrots? I hate them.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’re full of hates, child. What’s the matter with
parrots? God made them, I suppose.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, but he made Mr. Samson, too. When you
were in the country, you hadn’t any neighbours, had
you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Cows, sheep, horses, pigs, the owls—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But not a parrot or Mr. Samson. I wish he didn’t live
next door. He always tries to talk to me when he sees
me, over the hedge of the back garden. And once he
asked me to go into the house. He said he’d got a kitten
for me. So I said I didn’t like kittens, but really, Miss
Mole, I adore them. But I was frightened of him and
sometimes I dream about him. But I used to find—I
mean, if you talk about nasty things to somebody, they
stop worrying you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And how long has this been worrying you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, ever since—about two years ago when he tried to
give me the kitten.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Poor old man!’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I think he’s an old beast.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘There you are again! Is there anything you happen
to care for, besides kittens?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Lots of things,’ Ruth said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, I should like to hear about them, some time, for
a change. And I daresay Mr. Samson’s lonely too.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Too?’ Ruth repeated with a catch of her breath.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes. Like me,’ Hannah said. ‘Good night.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>A surprising answer for that little egotist and a good
exit, she said to herself with satisfaction. It would do
Ruth no harm to learn that other people, even those
middle-aged people who seem so secure to youth, could
suffer like herself, and Hannah doubted whether, until
this moment, anyone in the house had given Miss Mole
a thought detached from some personal connection. Her
comfort and happiness, for which the family might have
felt some responsibility, was either assumed or ignored.
She could well believe that Robert Corder considered any
inmate of his house a fortunate person, but even to
Wilfrid, who was as much an alien as herself, she was
only a kind of mirror in which he could study his own
reflection, while Ruth’s growing curiosity was only
a love of hearing stories. This lack of interest was
not flattering, but it had its advantages—like everything
else—she told herself, as she entered her dark bedroom
and went to the open window.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She knelt down and, laying her hands on the sill, she
rested her chin on them. The roofs of the opposite
houses were wet with a shower the clouds had dropped
as they scurried before a harassing little wind, like ships
sacrificing their cargo under pursuit, and the wind that
chased them brought to Hannah’s credulous nostrils a
damp smell of apples and moss. Far away, against the
dark sky, sweeping in ascending fields from the docks of
Radstowe, she thought, or imagined, she could see the
high ground hiding her own country. It lay snugly
behind that barrier, with its little farms and orchards,
its flat lands criss-crossed by willow-edged ditches and
cupped by hills. It was a country that satisfied two sides
of Hannah’s nature. She loved the homeliness of the
farms and cottages, washed with pink or white, each with
its big or little orchard where spotted pigs rooted in the
long grass: she loved the hills groined with pale limestone
and their solitary moor-like tops where the heather
became black with distance, but it was in the mingling
of the familiar and the unknown that she found her chief
delight. They seemed separate, but they were one: the
homesteads and the fields were only flesh on the bones of
earth and the same heart was beating under the grey
rocks and the apple trees, just as Hannah’s heart was
beating alike for the woman who wanted her own fireside,
and the one who wanted to wander, the one with a sane
desire for love and its obligations and the other who had
learnt to fear anything in the nature of a contract.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her own fireside was over there, behind the barrier,
and if she ever sat at it again it would be alone, or with
a dog or cat for company. It was ten years since she had
been inside the house and since then she had seen it
only once, coming upon it stealthily and peering through
the apple trees to make sure of its existence outside her
dreams. She had taken care not to intrude on the tenant,
lest he should think she came in search of the rent he
never paid, but she had seen that the house was really
there, a little flat-fronted cottage, badly needing another
wash of pink, with a plume of smoke very blue against a
cold grey sky. That was five years ago and anything might
have happened to it since then. It hurt her to think of it
neglected, perhaps deserted. It was cruel to ignore it,
absurd to own property about which her pride forbade her
to ask questions, she was acting with recklessness of
the future when she might want her home, but she had
been a fool and she must pay for her folly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The folly had had its sweetness and she remembered
the sweetness and folly together, the precious and the
worthless, without any sense of incongruity. All life
could be likened to that episode, and all human beings,
and the worst sorrows came from the failure to accept
imperfection, knowing it for the alloy it was and yet, by
some strange spiritual alchemy, seeing it as pure gold.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Like a wedding ring,’ Hannah said, twisting her lips
ironically.</p>

<p class='pindent'>A little spatter of rain fell between her and those
memories. She looked from the dim line on the horizon
to the lights of Radstowe, far below on her left hand, and
she thought they were like the camp-fires of innumerable
explorers in a strange and dangerous country. Each man
tended his own fire sedulously and to one, as to Hannah
Mole, what lay beyond the ring of light was hopeful
adventure; to another, as to Ruth, the justification of his
fears was in the darkness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hopeful adventure, even here in Robert Corder’s
house! She was grateful to Fortune who, in making her
a servant, had remembered to give her freedom and
happiness in herself. She might have been meek and
dutiful and dull inside as well as out, or she might have
been discontented and defiant. She was lucky, she
thought, as she knelt there with her face towards the
cottage which might be crumbling and her back to the
narrow room which held everything else she had, for the
chief of her possessions, as she knew, was the power to
see those lights as camp-fires, and herself as an adventuress.
She was not sure she told the truth in saying she was
lonely. Yes, lonely and tired too, sometimes, and chilled
by the thought of poor and solitary old age, but these
were moods that passed and there remained for her good
company the many natures in her own thin body. And
the rich old gentleman was steadily approaching.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The thought of him reminded her of Mr. Samson, who
had offered Ruth a kitten, and withheld information from
Robert Corder. He seemed to make a habit of talking
to people over hedges; she would give him another
opportunity, she decided, and very busy with her inventions
about him, she undressed swiftly. He might be a
bad old man, but he might be a rich one, and if he was so
free with his kittens for a little girl, she said to herself
in the vulgar manner that made Lilla wince, he might
be equally free with his money for an older one.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Upon my word,’ she said aloud, ‘I believe I’d marry
anyone who asked me—except Robert Corder,’ and she
chuckled as she got into bed and chuckled again when
she remembered that she was lying on Wilfrid’s mattress.</p>

<p class='pindent'>That was a dishonourable trick, she supposed, but it
did not prevent her from sleeping well. It was not the
first she had played in the course of her career and it
would not be the last. Each week she took threepence
from the housekeeping money to put in the plate on Sunday,
and she owed Mrs. Widdows exactly a penny halfpenny,
the price of a reel of silk. But what did Mrs.
Widdows owe her in the form of kindness? And why
should she pay for listening to sermons she could hear
for nothing from Robert Corder on any other day of the
week? These rigid codes of conduct were made for people
who did not know morality when they saw it. It was
immoral for the hardest-worked person in the house to
lie on the hardest bed: it would be wrong for Mr. Corder’s
housekeeper to let the offertory plate go by without a
contribution, but it was worse to rob the poor in the
person of herself. She was quite happy about the weekly
threepence and quite safe, for, to do Robert Corder
justice, he did not interfere with her expenditure or overlook
her accounts, and she recognized his little outburst
for what it was, but there might yet be trouble with Ethel
about the mattress.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Strange that, in a world where pain seemed inevitable,
there should be trouble about a mattress! Yes, it seemed
inevitable, not for her, who knew how to protect herself,
but for nearly everybody else: for little Mrs. Ridding
with that enigmatical look on her face, for Ethel, busy
with her suspicions, for Ruth with her fears, even for
Mr. Blenkinsop with his frustrated desire for peace.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She fell asleep, thinking of Mr. Blenkinsop with the
bags of gold under his arms.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XIII</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth had not learnt to accept imperfection. She saw it
all round her and she was in a constant state of rebellion
against it. She saw it in herself, in her father, in Ethel,
in the house and in her circumstances. Nothing, to her
mind, was what it should have been. The loss of her
mother was not included in this criticism. That was a
disaster for which there was no expression. She did not
join it to these minor but persistent frets as a cause
for discontent. It was too big for comparison or connection
with anything else she knew. It came from outside
and, in a way, it remained outside, as a black, cold
cloud would have been outside her body, but it had
emptied her life of all that had been soft and gracious
and amusing in it. Her father had told her that God,
for His own good purposes, had taken her mother to
Himself and, unwilling as she always was to believe in His
decisions, she had to submit to this one. No power but
God’s was great enough to bring about so terrible a
catastrophe, and she did not wonder that He wanted her
for Himself. It was selfish to take her, but it was natural,
and she had to endure the loss patiently because she was
helpless under it. The things against which Ruth rebelled
were those which might so easily have been different, and
her mother’s death had not created them; they had merely
become more apparent and some of them were actually
easier to bear without her. The closeness of her contact
with her mother’s mind had doubled her embarrassment
when her father was didactic or petty and Ethel was
unreasonable: the quick sympathy which both tried to
hide had magnified the importance of what they both
deplored: they suffered for and wanted to protect each
other, and Ruth could be more stoical when it was only
her father and sister and not her mother’s husband and
daughter who offended her. The tension of one side of
Ruth’s life had slackened a little when her mother died,
while, on another, it had tightened. Now that she need
not be careful to pretend, now that she could neither love
nor laugh—and it would have surprised Mrs. Corder’s
acquaintances and, perhaps, her husband, to know how
often she had made Ruth laugh—she could concentrate on
her dissatisfactions. She had her ideal of what a home
should be. The mother in it would be her mother, but
the father would be different. If it was necessary for him
to be a minister of religion, he would be the vicar of the
Established Church, and the church itself would be old
and dim and beautiful and people would not shake hands
across the yellow pews and talk intimately about their
ailments and their children. They would do that, if they
must, in the sunny churchyard, and quietly, with the
hush of the service on them and the influence of stained
glass and carved stone. The house would be old too,
with a cedar on the lawn, and several dogs, and inside
there would be pretty and precious things, things which
had belonged to ancestors, portraits and old silver, and
the ancestors would be admirals and generals and judges.
The sons of that house would go to public schools and
universities and no one would think it necessary to mention
it; the girls would have beauty and beautiful clothes
and gracious love affairs: they would not giggle with
young men, like Ethel, or be cross with everybody, like
Ruth: there would be order in that household and quiet
servants. She was not sure whether the father would be
more like a country gentleman than a vicar, interested in
agriculture and sport, or whether he would be vague and
gentle, with some absorbing hobby which made him
lovably absent-minded, but she knew he would never
embarrass his wife and children, he would neither be
effusive nor condescending with his parishioners, and his
children need not hesitate to ask anyone to tea. School
life and home life could merge into each other safely and
though, like all vicars, he would be more or less of a
public character, he could be trusted not to say things at
which his children’s friends could sneer.</p>

<p class='pindent'>These were the surroundings and the conditions Ruth
wanted and her mother had not taken them with her.
Ruth had wanted them almost as much while she lived,
and in default of the unattainable, she posed at school as
a stout Nonconformist and a despiser of aristocracy
who was fiercely loyal to her humble Puritan forebears.
There were girls in her form who went to Beresford Road
Chapel and, while her father preached, Ruth was listening
with those girls’ ears and framing replies to criticism,
though with much criticism she had not to deal. The girls
were as ready as their parents to admire, Ruth had her
reflected glory, but she could not risk the loss of it by
introducing these admirers into the home. Her father
had his place in the pulpit, Ruth had hers in the school,
where, with her defiances and the humour her family
never saw, she was considered an amusing and original
character by her contemporaries, but how would she
appear to them when her father called her Ruthie and
teased her and made rather foolish jokes in his desire to
put the young people at their ease and to show that he
could be a jolly, ordinary man? Their conception of her
would be changed; she would be different, too, and she
could never again be the self which came most naturally
to her at school.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It would have been simple in the old Vicarage; in
Beresford Road it was impossible. She kept her two
lives apart, despising herself for snobbishness and lack
of courage, but keeping the place she had made for
herself and living almost freely for half her time. No
one there would have suspected her of the fears that
assailed her at night or of yearnings for beauty within
and without. She was a hard worker and though this
keenness and an odd sense of fair play constrained her
from being tiresome in class, these virtues were forgiven
for the sake of her readiness to see and mimic the
peculiarities of her superiors; the Ruth who strolled
homewards with her friends was gay and impudent, or
downright and cynical according to her mood and the
impression she wished to make, and very different from
the one who, later on, brooded over the supper-table,
and to a Ruth who, one day, was showing off more successfully
than usual, it was terrible to turn and see the approaching
figure of Miss Mole, clad in a very old-fashioned
ulster. It might have been a handsome, and it
must have been a sturdy garment when it was bought: it had
a character which the oncoming of dusk and the drizzling
rain could not disguise: it gave Miss Mole a waist where
waists no longer existed and a breadth of shoulder out of
all proportion to her thin frame; it was impossible not to
notice it and it was all Ruth could do to sustain her mirth
under the sound of those rapidly-approaching footsteps.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The figure passed; Ruth felt a nudge at each side of
her; someone giggled and Ruth continued her chatter,
but when she parted from her companions, she began to
run, drawing sharp breaths through her piteously-parted
lips. She was like Peter: she had denied her friend, and
if those girls ever saw the ulster again and recognised Miss
Mole as the wearer, what would they think of Ruth?
They had nudged and giggled and she had not said a
word. She ought to have called out to Miss Mole and
stopped her, but she had been afraid of ridicule. She had
not only committed a disloyal act, but one which might
be discovered, and in that bitter moment she learnt that
secret sin could be forgotten, while sin revealed to the
world could be remembered for ever. All she could do
now was to hurry and wipe away some of the stain.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Going home was not quite as bad as it had been for
the last two years, she was not so anxious to linger in the
streets, her habit of running past the next-door house
and entering her own with a rush, was an old one, and
Miss Mole, lighting the hall gas, showed no surprise at
Ruth’s breathless entrance, though her sharply benevolent
eyes may have seen more than the dampness of Ruth’s
clothes as she said briskly, ‘Don’t stand about in your
coat. And you’ll change your stockings, won’t you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What about you, Miss Mole?’ Ruth said faintly.
‘You’re wet, too.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Mole patted the abominable ulster. ‘It can’t get
through this. Do go and change or you’ll have a cold and it
seems a pity to waste one when there isn’t a party to dodge.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth’s smile was wan. Miss Mole, revealing herself
as a person of humour and understanding, was simply
making things worse for her. She went towards the stairs
where there was more shadow. ‘Did you come across
Regent Square?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes. I’d been for a walk round the hill to look at the
river. Lovely it was, too, in the rain. The mist was thick
on the water and there was a tree on the other side like
a torch blazing through a fog. But the leaves will be
dropping under this rain.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>For a moment, Ruth was held from her purpose. She
wished Miss Mole would go on talking like that. She
said things differently, in Ruth’s experience, from other
people and in a different voice. She had spoken of a
moony night, and beauty and peace had stolen over her
listener, and now Ruth felt the chill danger of thick mist
and the joy of seeing light ahead. The necessity for
confession seemed less pressing, the world of vision
became of more importance than the one of facts, and
while she was persuading herself that it would be easy
and kinder to be silent, she began to speak.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Miss Mole,’ she said, ‘I think I saw you. I mean—I
saw you. But you went past so quickly and I was too late.
You know how things happen. I ought to have shouted
to you at once, but it would have looked so funny to the
other girls if I’d recognised you when you were nearly
out of sight, so I didn’t—but I feel so mean.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Mean?’ said Hannah. ‘I’m grateful. When I’m in
this ulster, I’m supposed to be invisible. I know what it’s
like. I ought not to wear it at all, but it’s thick and
it’s an old friend. If you’d stopped me I should have
died of shame. Thank goodness you didn’t. I
won’t run the risk again, except in the dark. Now will
you kindly go and change those clothes? You ought to
have worn your mackintosh. It’s high-tea night and when
I was up on the hill I suddenly thought of mushrooms and
I bought some on the way home. We’ll have them with
scrambled eggs and you can come and help me if you like.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth was childish in some ways, but she was not
stupid. She could see that Miss Mole’s words might be
tactful as well as true. She had not dared to ask whether
Miss Mole had seen and avoided her and, if so, whether
it was for her own sake or for Ruth’s. The confession had
not been a full one, but, after Miss Mole’s expressed
horror of the ulster, how could she mention it? That
would have been easing her soul at the cost of Miss
Mole’s feelings and though it was convenient to say no
more, it was not necessarily wrong. Less and less, as
she grew older, did she believe that the unpleasant
things were the good ones and, as she slowly changed her
stockings, she gave way willingly to the belief, which
had been reluctant until to-day, that Miss Mole could
be trusted with her omissions as safely as with her fears.
She felt, rather than thought, that Miss Mole’s mind
could overleap gaps and understand how they came there,
and when she went down to the kitchen, she felt stiff
and awkward in the consciousness of a surrender she had
been determined not to make.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Mole was skinning the mushrooms, and when she
had shown Ruth how to do it they sat at the kitchen table
together and worked busily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ve been thinking about clothes,’ Hannah said, and
Ruth, though she turned red, decided that it was a good
thing to talk about them at once, before the thought of
the ulster became a solid barrier against the subject.
‘I’ve always liked them, and never had what I wanted.
When I went to school, we weren’t all dressed alike, and
I was a scarecrow—but much more noticeable. The only
thing to do was to pretend I had an original taste in dress
and the other poor things hadn’t, and I’ve done that ever
since, except about my shoes and stockings. I’m extravagant
about them, so I have to go short elsewhere.’
She glanced down at the shoes she had been too hurried
to change. ‘There isn’t a better pair in Radstowe, but
I broke a window with this one once,’ she said carelessly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth looked up. ‘What did you do that for?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s one of the stories I can’t tell you, but it was very
sad—and exciting.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Can’t you tell me, really? You’re always talking
about stories and not telling them. There’s the one about
the burglar—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah yes, but there’s so little time. You have to work in
the evenings and then you have to go to bed, or there’s
someone else in the room.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘To-night would be a good night,’ Ruth suggested,
‘and I haven’t so very much to do. Unless Wilfrid’s
going to be in?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, he’ll be out.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh well, then—!’ Ruth exclaimed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘We’ll see. You have to be in the right mood for telling
stories. But do remind me to ask Ethel if she knows any
old woman who would condescend to wear that ulster.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, Miss Mole,’ Ruth almost pleaded, ‘I shouldn’t
give it away, if you like it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t. I merely master it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But you said it was an old friend, and there must be
yards and yards of stuff in it. Perhaps you could have it
altered.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, I’m not brave enough to show it to a tailor. But
I think I’ll keep it. It’s good enough for wearing to the
pillar-box on a dark night, but I won’t wear it anywhere
else,’ she said, and now Ruth knew that Miss Mole could
forgive everything she understood, and that she probably
understood everything.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XIV</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>For once, Hannah’s hands were idle. She lay back in
the armchair by the dining-room fire with a book on her
knee, and Ruth, glancing up from her work, now and
then, saw that her eyes were often shut. She looked
different like that; younger and, though Ruth did not
find words for her thought, more vulnerable. Her dress
of dark red silk was not fashionable and it was old, but
the skirt of it and her silk stockings shimmered in the
firelight, the buckles on her slippers sparkled, and her
idleness and her elegant feet gave Ruth a feeling of satisfaction
and of approach to the ideal life in the Vicarage,
where everybody changed for dinner, and no one was in a
hurry. Her mother, whose resistance to evening meetings
had not been complete and who might be called out at
any hour on missions of mercy, had seldom worn a dress
unsuitable for sudden excursions, and this had offended
Ruth’s sense of fitness and added to the restlessness of a
home in which everybody was expected to be doing good
outside it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>All stuffy things had been implied, for Ruth, in the
name of housekeeper; stuffy frocks, thick stockings, a
prim face and an oppressive sense of duty, yet here was
Miss Mole looking, for all her lack of fashion, like a lady
who belonged to a world unconnected with chapels,
where beauty and leisure were expected and attained.
It was a peep through a door Ruth had always wanted to
open, and she said quietly, ‘I like it when you’re not
darning.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah opened her eyes for a moment. ‘Half asleep,’
she said drowsily and shut them again. This was not the
truth, for her mind was busy, but Hannah was not
scrupulous about truth. She was not convinced of its
positive value as human beings knew it, she considered
it a limiting and an embarrassing convention. The bare
truth was often dull and more often awkward, while
lies were a form of imagination and a protection for the
privacy of her thoughts and, in a life lived in houses
which were not her own and where she was never safe
from intrusion, it was necessary to have this retreat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Now, behind the veil of her sleepiness, she was wondering
if she was altogether glad of Ruth’s change of
front. It was what she had been working for and she
found, once more, that gain was often loss. She had won
Ruth and that exciting campaign was over. It had been
conducted with a skill of which, unfortunately, only she
was aware, and of which she could not boast, and her
reward was a possession needing care and involving
obligations. She was growing fond of Ruth and, ten years
ago, she had promised herself future freedom from soft
emotions. They were more trouble than they were worth,
but vanity was her weakness. She strove for admiration
and found she could get nothing without giving something
else. She saw that she would have to resign herself to
being fond of Ruth, she had gone too far to withdraw,
but there she would have to stop: she must not saddle
herself with the whole family and, indeed, it was not
likely that she would have the chance. Robert Corder
and she were naturally antipathetic, though he had been
amiable this evening, praising the mushrooms, with perhaps
a covert suggestion that the kitchen was her sphere
and she would do well to stay in it, while Ethel was so
much divided against herself, dragged in one direction
by religion and in another by mundane desires, that no
one else could put the parts together and handle them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ve nearly finished,’ she heard Ruth saying, ‘I’m
nearly ready for the burglar story.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s not a good one for this time of night.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, Miss Mole, you said you liked him!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘So I did, but then I’ve got queer tastes. And I’m
afraid you’ve scamped your work.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But it’s such a chance—when everybody’s out.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh well—’ Hannah said, hastily gathering her thoughts.
‘It was when I was living with an old lady who wore a
wig. People without experience of wigs believe they
simplify life. They think you just take them off and put
them on. Nothing of the sort. A wig needs as much care
as a pedigree Pekinese and I know, because I’ve looked
after both. I lost a situation once because a woman heard
me telling her nasty little dog what I really thought of it,
but it did me good, and the dog too, I daresay. Well,
anyhow, this old lady had a wig, in fact she had two,
because they had to be sent to the hairdresser, now and
then, to be tidied up, and they were bright gold. She
was rich, and I suppose she liked the colour. But she
wasn’t a bad old woman. I was fond of her. Well, one
night—it was a lonely house, simply asking for burglars
to walk into it—and I ought to have told you that one of
the wigs had come back from the hairdresser that very
evening, in a registered parcel, and I’d left it, unopened,
on the landing table where the bedroom candles were
put. It was that kind of house.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah,’ said Ruth, ‘the burglar thought it was jewels!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Wait a minute. I saw my old lady into bed and into
her nightcap and I longed to tell her how nice she looked
when she wasn’t tricked out in the yellow hair—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But it must have been awful when the wig was off and
the cap wasn’t on! I don’t think I could have stayed
there.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I didn’t stay long. The old lady died. She was going
to leave me some money, she said, and I think she meant
it, but she died first. It’s a way old ladies have.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Did she die of fright about the burglar?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘She didn’t know there’d been one, because he took
nothing. Nothing!’ Hannah repeated impressively.
‘And all through me! If she’d known that, she might have
given me the money there and then.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And you didn’t tell her?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I haven’t told a soul until to-night. And I’d better
warn you that the story’s got a moral.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Of course it has. And the moral’s that you mustn’t
be too modest.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That’s always been one of my failings,’ Hannah said
with a wink. ‘But this story’s hanging fire a bit, isn’t it?
I’ll cut it short. I woke up in the night and heard a
rustling sort of noise. “Mice!” I said to myself, but it
wasn’t exactly a mousy noise. So I listened and my heart
began to thump and, very quietly, I got out of bed.
I turned the door handle without making a sound, and
then—’ she sat up to illustrate her action, ‘I threw the
door open—like that—and what do you think I saw?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth shook her head. She knew she was not expected
to reply.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I saw the burglar, looking at himself in the mirror,
with my old lady’s wig on the top of his head!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then,’ said Ruth slowly, ‘there must have been a light
on the landing.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, there was,’ Hannah said quickly. ‘He’d turned
it on. And that’s where you’re supposed to laugh and you
haven’t even smiled.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m thinking about the light. He can’t have been a
good burglar.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘He wasn’t. He was a funny one. I laughed and he
laughed and, after that, we felt we were friends, and he
went away like a gentleman, saying he was glad he’d met
me. And the moral is that we must be ready to laugh on
the most terrifying occasions. Now, I call that rather
a good story and a good moral, and you don’t seem
to like it a bit.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m rather worried about it,’ said Ruth, and she
looked frowningly past Hannah’s head, ‘because, if it was
a house that had bedroom candles, would the landing
have had electric light? I really do like the story, Miss
Mole, but I can’t bear not to get things clear. Now, if
he’d had an electric torch—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ said Hannah gloomily, ‘I ought to have thought
of that, but it wouldn’t have done. You see, the drama
of the thing is opening your bedroom door in the dark,
simply shaking like a leaf, as they say, and finding a
blaze of light and a burglar standing in front of a looking-glass
with a wig on his head. The bedroom candles were
a mistake.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Miss Mole,’ Ruth said solemnly, ‘did you make it up?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Three times Hannah slowly nodded her head catching
her lip like a naughty child. ‘If I’d had more time,’ she
began apologetically—</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If you’d had more time, I shouldn’t have found out,’
Ruth said, and the anxious look, which troubled Hannah,
returned to her face. ‘And I suppose it isn’t true about
your cottage and the owls.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Every word of it,’ Hannah said. ‘And the old lady
and the wigs are true, but what was the good of them
without the burglar? You wanted a burglar and I had
to give you a nice one.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But have you ever known a nasty one?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, but I can make one up.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth smiled feebly. ‘Ethel would think it was dreadful.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I wouldn’t have told it to Ethel,’ Hannah said quickly,
and Ruth’s smile broadened.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘She’d think it was lying.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not lying. Fiction,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, fiction,’ Ruth agreed willingly. ‘But how,’ she
cried, ‘am I going to know when it really happened and
when it didn’t?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah, that’s the fun of it. You’ve got to find out and,
next time, I shall be more careful.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And did you break the window with your foot?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, that was true.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And you can’t tell me about that?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You wouldn’t like it, though it had its funny side,
I must admit. I’m afraid you wouldn’t see it. You’re
not very good at laughing.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No. But I’m glad it’s true about the cottage,’ she said
contentedly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Are you?’ Hannah asked rather wearily, and she sank
back in her chair and shut her eyes again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth felt a little uneasy. The quality of Miss Mole’s
relaxation had changed. She was no longer a lady of
leisure, but one who was tired, and, perhaps, unhappy,
and Ruth had a peep through another door which led
into the places where Miss Mole’s spirit had wandered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She cleared her throat and said in a small voice, ‘Miss
Mole, are you all right?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m doing my best,’ Hannah said, smiling, but keeping
her eyes shut.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I mean, do you feel ill, or something?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t feel ill, but I do feel something.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘A pain?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘A kind of pain.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, would you like anything?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Heaps of things,’ Hannah said, and now she disclosed
her eyes which were bright and merry. ‘I want a small
fortune to begin with. Fetch me that, if you can. If you
can’t, you’d better go to bed.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not yet. Let’s talk about it. If you had it, what would
you do?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Pack my box. No offence meant, but wouldn’t you
do it yourself?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I suppose so,’ Ruth said, trying to be reasonable and
not hurt.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’d pack my box, but I’d leave you my little ship, for
remembrance, and a good home. I should want a good
home for it. It would be an awkward thing to take into
the Arabian desert, for instance. You want ships of the
desert there, not bottled ones. However, I’m not sure
that I should go to Arabia. I’ve never been able to eat
dates. London first, and new clothes of the very best cut
and quality, and while they’re being made, for I’m not
going to have anything off a peg, I’ll go into travel agencies
and ask questions of young men who don’t know the
answers.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘How do you know they don’t?’ Ruth asked sharply.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Because I’ve tried them. Many an afternoon I’ve
spent, leaning over one of those counters. You get all
the uncertainty of foreign travel without the expense.
But I won’t make things too difficult for them at first.
I’m going to Spain. I’ve never been there though it’s
full of my own castles.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And of mine,’ said Ruth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, I wonder there’s any room left in the place. Let’s
go and see. Will you come with me?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth nodded. ‘I’d love to.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Good,’ said Miss Mole. ‘I can easily afford it. And
after that, where shall we go? Not Italy. Too much
culture and too many spinsters like myself. We might
pick up a little boat at Marseilles and go jogging down
the Mediterranean. And we wouldn’t come back until
we wanted to, and we’d begun to wish we hadn’t so much
time on our hands. But we’d see South America first.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>The loud ringing of the front door bell shattered the
visions they were sharing of Creole beauties, vast mountain
ranges, immense rivers and impassable jungles.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘There!’ Ruth exclaimed. ‘Somebody’s come to spoil
it!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Only the postman,’ Hannah said airily, ‘with a
registered letter from my lawyers, about the fortune.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was the chance that something exciting was
going to happen with every knock or ring, and though
few people would have applied the adjective to Mr.
Blenkinsop, who was standing on the doorstep, Hannah
felt laughter rising in her at the sight of him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I call this very kind,’ she said brightly. ‘Do come in.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Raising his hat, Mr. Blenkinsop asked if Mr. Corder
was at home.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Mr. Corder?’ Hannah said, pretending to be disappointed.
‘No, he’s out.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m sorry,’ said Mr. Blenkinsop, turning to go.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Wait a bit!’ Hannah cried. ‘I haven’t seen you since
I carried up your dinner. But I’ve heard about you.
Come in, and I’ll tell you what I’ve heard.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Thank you, but I wanted to see Mr. Corder. I’ll
come another day.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You won’t find him in on a Wednesday. It’s the week-night
service.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Stupid of me,’ Mr. Blenkinsop muttered.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Mr. Corder will consider it a sad lapse of memory.
I don’t think I’ll tell him you came.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s a matter of indifference to me,’ he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, that’s what he’ll realize, I’m afraid. I’ve looked
for you every Sunday, Mr. Blenkinsop.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t quite see why you should trouble.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I have a tenderness for Mr. Corder’s feelings.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh,’ said Mr. Blenkinsop, ‘so you’ve settled down.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You can put it that way if you like. I wish you’d come
in, but it’s a nice night, after the rain,’ she said, looking
skyward. ‘What bright stars!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, very bright.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But it’s cold,’ said Miss Mole.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Don’t let me keep you,’ said he, but he did not
move, and Hannah went on conversationally. ‘Yes, it’s
cold, but I suppose we ought to call it seasonable. It’s
funny about that word. It’s only cold, never hot,
weather that’s seasonable. Now why? I find words very
fascinating.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m afraid,’ Mr. Blenkinsop said stiffly, ‘I mustn’t
stay here and discuss etymology.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I thought that was beetles,’ Hannah said innocently,
‘and we can have a practical study of them in the kitchen,
if you like. I seem doomed to have trouble in kitchens.
And that reminds me—How are the Riddings getting on?
You know, I feel I haven’t been properly thanked for
that evening.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Thanked!’ Mr. Blenkinsop exclaimed, staring at her
malignantly. ‘What I want to know is why on earth you
wanted to do it. And as for thanks, whose did you expect?’
he demanded, and with those words he marched away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She had roused him at last, but she thought his fervour
somewhat disproportionate to the slightness of the inconvenience
he suffered.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XV</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>That night, Ethel left the Girls’ Club in the charge of
Miss Patsy Withers and another helper and went home
earlier than usual. She had a headache and felt miserable.
It was cold in the tramcar, after the heat of the Mission
Room, and she wanted to be in bed with a hot-water bottle
and something warm to drink, and she wished, as she
wished more often than anyone suspected, that she could
find her mother at home. Ethel’s loss was of a different
nature from Ruth’s. For Ethel, her mother had been a
quiet voice and a kind hand, a voice never raised in
expostulation and a hand that knew how to put a pillow
under an aching head. When she was overwrought and
her mother applied physical remedies, it did not occur
to Ethel that in this refusal to reprove or advise, this
assumption that her child was ill, her mother was doing
all she could to treat her mentally. Ethel’s life was so
fiercely subjective that her mother, for her, had hardly
existed objectively. Perhaps no one and nothing existed
for her in that sense and inevitably she became the prey
of every misadventure. Now she sat huddled in her
corner, trying to keep her eyes shut to ease her headache,
but each time the tramcar stopped she had to open them
to see who was boarding it or alighting: she had to make
a quick comparison of each woman’s clothes with her
own, to wonder if she could twist her hat into the shape of
the one opposite, or train her hair to fall over her ears
like that of the girl who had just come in, and under this
eagerness to be doing something, this restlessness which
had its value, there was a weariness of the Girls’ Club and
a sense of futility.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Doris had not been there, Doris, her favourite, who
had been elevated to service in the Corder’s household,
and was supposed to adore Miss Ethel. There had been
laughter of a familiar kind when her absence was mentioned
and Ethel had felt sharp tears spring into her eyes, as
though she had been struck. They were laughing because
they knew more about Doris than she did, and
they were glad because the favourite was proved disloyal.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ethel told herself she was too sensitive, but that was
her nature. She was hurt and she was anxious and her
head throbbed more violently as she pictured Doris
wandering in the darkness with a young man and
imagined, with the inaccuracy of theoretical knowledge,
the probably disastrous progress of that courtship. She
would have to speak to Doris, and she knew that, in such
matters, Doris would see her as a child in arms and feed
her with appropriate sops. She had felt sure of her
influence over the girl and her certainty was taken from
her. Life, for Ethel, was something like walking across
a bog, leaping from what looked like a solid tuft to another
and finding many of them shaking and some sinking
under her, and she lost her nerve, and then her judgment,
at each mistake. Doris’s absence and the girls’ laughter
had made the friendliness of Patsy Withers the more
welcome and, in a gust of grateful confidence, Ethel had
talked about Miss Mole and detected a gleam of pleasure
in Patsy’s eyes when she told the puzzling story about
the mattresses. It had been rather silly to tell her, Ethel
thought, but then, she was so impulsive; she was sensitive
and impulsive, and no one understood her now except
Howard—and Wilfrid, when he was not teasing her.
She had an unbounded admiration for her father, but she
wished he had more time and patience to spare her.
He had a way of making her difficulties seem very small
in comparison with his own and of suggesting that he
had cares enough already. There was Miss Mole—Ethel
felt guilty again at the thought of her—who always
listened with interest, but how could anyone be sure she
was not another of those tufts? And there was God, she
remembered hurriedly, and she looked askance at her
neighbours, as though they had divined her forgetfulness.
No one was looking at her and she shut her eyes again,
saying she would pray, she must have more faith, and
with that thought, or because the tramcar stopped at the
place where she intended to get out, her troubles became
less pressing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She could have gone on to the halt at the end of Beresford
Road, but this one was at the end of University
Walk and once, as she walked back from the club, Wilfrid
had overtaken her there and they had gone home together,
by way of Prince’s Road, because Wilfrid had said it was
more romantic, and then he had spoilt her happiness by
asking why she walked so slowly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wilfrid was one of Ethel’s tufts, but so bright, so
alluring, that she could not believe it would betray her,
and she had found her own way of explaining its instability.
It was not altogether satisfactory and she knew
it, but it served for consolation when her faith in herself
and in the charms she hoped she possessed, was tottering.
Wilfrid and she were cousins and when he was unkind
to her it was when he remembered that relationship.
He had to repress her feelings and hide his own under
his banter. It was noble of him, but Ethel would have
been happier if there could have been one passionate
scene which would have become a sacred memory,
casting its pale light over the rest of their barren lives,
and thinking of Wilfrid thus, hoping to hear his gay voice
behind her and trying to walk as she would like him to
see her walking, she followed the route they had taken
together, up Prince’s Road, dim and wide and quiet, with
the shadows of bare branches outlined on the pavement
in the lamplight.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The drizzling rain of the afternoon had stopped, there
was a starry sky above her, and though she was not
moved by beauty, the influence of the place and hour was
soothing and she went slowly, forgetting her troubles,
hardly thinking, but letting little plans and hopes—her
dress for the Spenser-Smiths’ party, the altering of her
hat, a cup of cocoa beside the fire and a few words with
Wilfrid before she went to bed—flit in pictures across her
mind, and then, at the angle made by the junction of
Prince’s and Beresford Roads, she stopped for a dreadful
moment before she turned and ran.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Like Ruth, earlier in the day, she was strangling her
sobs—and she was happier than Ruth, because she was
not pursued by her own disloyalty, but she was also more
miserable, because, with what she called Wilfrid’s faithlessness,
her world was darkened. The stars had gone
out when she saw him a few yards ahead of her, beyond
the turning, holding a girl’s hand as though, when she
offered it in farewell, he could not let it go. There was no
mistaking Wilfrid’s bare head and his slim figure leaning
backwards as he held the girl’s hand at arm’s length, to
see her better, perhaps, or to draw her to him, and as
Ethel ran, she was caught by a greater pain than that of
seeing Wilfrid’s alliance with another, though the two
were mingled; it was the primitive pain of being undesired
by any man and the conviction—acknowledged in the
moment’s misery—that no one would ever hold her hand
in that half-playful, lingering grasp.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Centuries of loneliness seemed to pass over her before
she reached the garden gate and saw, through her blurred
eyes, one bulky figure, standing there, changed into two.
She rushed past them. She had left Wilfrid, holding a
girl’s hand, to find Doris in a young man’s arms, and they
had both betrayed her. She sped up the path and banged
the door in the face of Doris who was following behind
her; she flung open the door of the dining-room and saw
Ruth and Miss Mole smiling at each other across the
hearthrug and for an instant she stood there before she
turned and went stumblingly, noisily, up the stairs to her
room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The sight of her, distraught and angry, remained like
a material object in the doorway, and when Hannah
looked at Ruth she saw that her face was white.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, what can have happened now?’ she moaned.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah had no answer ready, and a knock at the front
door called her to open it. There stood Doris, her head
flung up, her meekly virtuous expression changed to one
of defiance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘He’s a steady, respectable young man,’ she said, ‘and
if he wasn’t it would be all the same! I’ve as good a right
to walk out as anybody else, and more chance than some
I could name, and so I’m willing to tell her at her convenience.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Bless my soul!’ Hannah said mildly, looking the little
maid up and down, and what she left out of her voice,
she put into that cool glance. ‘You trot up to bed and
I’ll talk to you in the morning,’ she said, and Doris went.
Hannah twisted her nose in satisfaction. It was a good
thing there was some one capable of command in a house
inhabited by one young woman who was distraught,
another who was defiant, and a child who looked ready
to faint.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Life in the happy Nonconformist home!’ she thought.
‘This would do Mr. Blenkinsop a power of good,’ and
she stepped outside the door and a few paces down the
path, to taste the freshness of the night before she went
back to Ruth. She could still see Ethel’s face clearly
against the darkness. It was the face of one who ragingly
but helplessly had watched murder done, and almost
mechanically, but with a grim smile, Hannah cast her
eyes about for the corpse.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Something swift and dark curvetted past her feet and,
at the same moment, she heard the thick voice of Mr.
Samson in its nightly call of ‘Puss, Puss, Puss!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Your cat’s here,’ she cried back, and she crossed the
grass plot and looked over the dividing hedge of laurel
to see Mr. Samson standing where the parrot’s cage had
been. ‘Your cat’s here, in the garden,’ she said again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That you, Miss Fitt?’ he said in a rumble. ‘Catch her
for me, can you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Catch an eel!’ Hannah said, making a dart for the
kitten who was amused by the clumsiness of these human
beings.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Gently does it,’ Mr. Samson advised. ‘You’ve got a
good voice for calling a cat. I’d come and catch her myself,
but I might be caught by the Reverend—Ha, ha!
Got her? Good! Hand her over. This’ll bring on my
bronchitis again, I shouldn’t wonder. Haven’t been
outside the house for a week, but I’ve had my eye on you,
out of the window. ’Tisn’t much I miss. I’ve seen you
running in and out, looking so perky, and off to the
chapel on Sunday! Well, when you feel like it, Miss Fitt,
just come in and have a talk and a look at my cats.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Shall I? Perhaps I will, but I must go back now and
look after my little girl.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What, the scared one? Ought to be in bed,’ Mr.
Samson growled.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And you’ve got my name wrong,’ Hannah said, ‘My
name is Mole.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That’s a silly kind of a name,’ he said indignantly.
‘I’ll stick to the one I’ve given you—Miss Fitt! See the
joke? That’s what you are and if you don’t know it you’ll
soon find out.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh—I see!’ Hannah said, and laughed so clearly that
a young man, coming whistling down the street, stopped
his own music to listen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wilfrid was by her side when she reached the door and
he slipped his arm into hers. ‘What’s the meaning of
this, Mona Lisa? I heard sounds of revelry and girlish
laughter. Clandestine meetings with our godless neighbour?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Catching his cat,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Useful things, cats,’ said Wilfrid. ‘And dogs. I
suppose the uncle isn’t in yet, but you’ve been running
it rather close, you know. And don’t try to look severe,
because you can’t, with love’s young dream all over your
face.’ He shut the door and looked round the hall as
though he scented trouble. ‘Ethel in?’ he asked carelessly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ said Hannah, and she gave him a sharp look.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He shrugged his shoulders and spread his hands.
‘It’s not my fault, Mona Lisa,’ he said languidly, but
there was dancing laughter in his eyes. ‘How did I know
she’d come home by Prince’s Road?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t know what you’re talking about,’ Hannah
said, and she went into the dining-room where Ruth was
crouching by the fire, her face as sharp as a rat’s.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You left me alone in the house,’ she complained
bitterly. ‘You needn’t have done that, need you? And
Ethel might have come down and killed me.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Don’t be ridiculous. Come along to bed.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But you don’t know, you don’t know! This is the first
bad one she’s had since you came. I can’t go into that
room and listen to her banging. She’ll do it for hours
and I can hear her.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What am I to do with you all?’ Hannah asked sadly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And we’d had such a happy evening,’ Ruth went on.
‘It’s no good being happy. It’s better to be miserable all
the time.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And still better to be brave. Think of me and the
burglar!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth was not to be comforted. ‘That’s only a story.
This is a bad dream that keeps coming back.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘My poor lamb,’ Hannah said, ‘you shall sleep in my
room if I have to sleep on the floor.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Can I?’ It was pitiable to see how the sharp face
softened.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And you’d better be quick about it,’ Wilfrid said
through the open door. ‘I can hear the uncle marching
up the path.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah paused to give him a nod of gratitude as she
hurried Ruth up the stairs. There was nothing seriously
wrong with that boy: he had the kindest heart in the house,
but it was not the house he ought to have been in.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XVI</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Leaving a defiant maid-servant and a nervous child on
the top landing, Hannah descended to the one below,
where she found Wilfrid waiting for her in his bedroom
doorway and listening, between apprehension and amusement,
to the sounds in Ethel’s room. These were the
banging of drawers and the rattling of their handles
under the shock, and Ethel’s footsteps thudding stubbornly
across the floor, and Wilfrid made a gesture in
their direction, and whispered, ‘Come in for a minute.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I can’t. I must get your uncle’s tea.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Let him wait! He’s been to the Spenser-Smiths’ and
had a jolly good supper. He came back in their car.
I heard it at the gate. He’ll be purring like a well-fed cat.
As for you, Mona Lisa, you look like a stray one.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I do feel rather lost. I think I’ll ask Mr. Samson if he’s
got room for me among the others.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And it’s all my fault,’ Wilfrid sighed, dramatically
running his fingers through his hair. ‘But why the deuce
shouldn’t I walk home with a girl? It’s no more than
common courtesy. And if I held her hand a bit longer
than was necessary, what’s that to Ethel?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Nothing at all I should think. Don’t distress yourself,’
Hannah said coldly. ‘There’s been trouble with Doris.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘All right, Mona Lisa, all right! I can see you’re thinking
I’m a conceited puppy. Have it your own way. But
that doesn’t account for her running like a hare when she
saw me. And what’s Doris been doing?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Walking out with a young man, I believe.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And I caught you flirting with old Samson! My word,
we have been going it! Wouldn’t the uncle be pleased!
He’s a bit morbid about intercourse between the sexes.
Of course he approves of marriage, but the preliminaries
make him sick. I call it an objectionable characteristic.
How did he get married himself? But then, anything
the uncle does is on a higher plane! I suppose,’ he said
slyly, ‘you haven’t noticed that?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah’s face lost all expression. That was her answer
to Wilfrid and her own resistance to temptation. ‘And
what about your own preliminaries, as you call them?’
she asked. ‘Are you engaged to the young woman?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Engaged! Don’t be simple!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, in my young days, if we held hands we meant
something by it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, we meant something, I assure you. And how dull
your young days must have been, poor Mona Lisa.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No,’ said Hannah, ‘they weren’t, because I wasn’t. It
isn’t the days that are dull, it’s the people who can’t see
them properly. What on earth do you think I should do
in this house if I couldn’t make amusement for myself?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, come, I do my best, but you’ve got a professional
conscience. I admire you for it, but it doesn’t deceive
me. Not in the least. Let’s exchange views about the
uncle, Mona Lisa. It would do us both all the good in
the world.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I can’t stay long enough,’ Hannah said, ‘But I’ll tell
you one thing you’ll like.’ She smiled at him very sweetly.
‘There’s a remarkably strong family likeness between
you and him. Not in the face. In the character,’ and with
that, and a spiteful little grimace across her shoulder, she
left him, and forgot her mendacious triumph as she
heard Ethel shut her wardrobe door with a vicious bang.</p>

<p class='pindent'>What was she to do with this family? she asked herself,
as she ran down the stairs. And why should she stay?
She was not so old or so useless that she could not get
another post, but she remembered Ruth, snuggling under
the bedclothes and saying childishly, ‘Whatever did I do
without you?’ and she remembered her compact with
Mrs. Corder.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ll make a job of it,’ she said, rapidly preparing Mr.
Corder’s tray, and she carried it into his study with
secret pomp, as though, in this ritual, she dedicated
herself to the family’s service.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Robert Corder made a handsome figure, standing on
the hearthrug, with his head thrown back and some of
the urbanity, fit for a visit to the Spenser-Smiths’, still
beaming from him, and at the sight of him, Hannah’s
faith in her resolutions failed her. She could deal with
hysteria, she could help those she pitied, but, in the
presence of this man, could she sustain her character of
industrious nonentity? Something alive seemed to turn
in her breast. It was the demon of mischief who lay
there; he was stretching himself in lazy preparation for
action and, if she was not careful, he would presently
express himself in speech. Perhaps, she thought, a little,
a very little, liberty would be good for him: if she kept
him too quiet, he would suddenly get out of control, and
there would be an end to her high endeavours for the
family. The best thing, she decided swiftly, was to be
natural: that would satisfy the demon and it was the golden
rule for manners, but if she obeyed it at this moment,
she would throw the teapot at Mr. Corder’s head. She
had had a tiring day and he stood there, like a large,
healthy animal waiting to be fed, and made no movement
to relieve her of the tray.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If you would kindly take those books off the table,’
she said politely, ‘I shall be able to put this down.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>He looked at his watch before he obliged her. ‘Half-past
ten,’ he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Is that all?’ Hannah said pleasantly. ‘I thought it was
about eleven,’ and before he had time to make one of the
several retorts that must have occurred to him, she
exclaimed, ‘And now I’ve forgotten the biscuits!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Don’t trouble about them, Miss Mole. I had supper
with Mr. and Mrs. Spenser-Smith.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>She recognised the cue for a murmur of congratulation
or envy, but she chose to miss it. ‘Then, if you don’t
want them, I’ll say good night, Mr. Corder.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Just a moment, Miss Mole. Mrs. Spenser-Smith
expressed some surprise that you had not been to see her.
I think it would be courteous to pay her that attention.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then I’ll try to pop in some afternoon, when I’m
having a walk.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Robert Corder’s quick little frown, like Ruth’s, but
different in its causes, came and went. ‘Her At Home day
is the first Friday in the month.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Does she have an At Home day?’ Hannah asked with
a wide smile. ‘I thought that was unfashionable. Then
I can’t go till December.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You misunderstand me,’ he said gently. ‘It might be
better for you to avoid that day.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, they’re dreary occasions, aren’t they? Thank
you for telling me. Good night.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>She knew she would be called back when she reached
the door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Another thing, Miss Mole. I shall be asking a gentleman
to supper next week. I think Thursday would be
the best day. He has just taken up the ministry of Highfield
Chapel—a small place, but I suppose he considers
it promotion—and I feel we ought to do what we can to
welcome him. You will bear that in mind, won’t you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ Hannah said. ‘Do you want anything special to
eat?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I can safely leave that to you, I’m sure. In fact, I
think I ought to say how much I appreciate the care you
have given to our meals.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m glad you’re pleased,’ she said sincerely. If he was
not obtuse, he was generous, and she smiled as she spoke;
then her eyes, leaving his face, fell on that of Mrs. Corder
who was listening attentively to all they said, and Hannah
persuaded herself that Mrs. Corder was glad to think of
Ruth, upstairs in the dovecot, and trusted Hannah to do
what she could for Ethel. ‘And, by the way,’ Hannah
said, ‘is the minister married?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Corder’s annoyance expressed itself in a somewhat
sickly smile. ‘Always the first question!’ he exclaimed.
‘But is it of any real importance to you, Miss Mole?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Of great importance,’ she replied, ‘because I suppose,
if he is, he will bring his wife.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Robert Corder turned away quickly. ‘No, no, he’s not
married,’ he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She looked at his back almost tenderly. The poor man
could not open his mouth without betraying himself and
though she had said nothing at which he could reasonably
take offence, perhaps she had given him something to
think about, and her demon had had his little outing and
she had a soothing draught to offer Ethel when she
carried up a cup of hot milk and knocked at her door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was a little while before she gained admittance. She
had the impression that everything Ethel possessed was
being hurriedly concealed in drawers and cupboards and,
when she entered, there were still signs of disorder in
the room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Don’t worry about Doris,’ she said at once. ‘I’ll have
a few words with her in the morning. It will be easier
for me than for you. And drink this while it’s hot.’ She
tried to avoid looking at Ethel’s scarred face, but Ethel
showed no more shame than she had shown control.
‘I’m all in favour of walking out, but I should like to
know something about the young man.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘She ought to have told me!’ Ethel exclaimed. ‘I’ve
been so good to her!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ Hannah said, ‘it’s a mistake to be good to people,
if you’re hoping for reward, because you won’t get it.
It would have been better for both of you if you’d tried
to train her. You’ll feel ashamed of her, to-morrow week,
when she slams the dishes on the table. Did you know
your father is asking a minister to supper?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ethel, who had been restive under reproof, rolling her
eyes and threatening to bolt, steadied herself as Hannah
produced this carrot. ‘A minister! Who is it?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t know,’ Hannah said carelessly. ‘Some young
man who’s got a new cure of souls—if you have such
things in your denomination. Anyhow, I hope he’ll cure
them.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then it must be the new minister at Highfield Chapel.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That’s the man. We shall have to kill the fatted calf,
I suppose,’ Hannah said, and she wished it was possible
to put a love potion into the ginger-beer which was the
Corders’ festal beverage. Ethel loved, and married to a
minister, would be a useful member of society, and he
must have his fatted calf, so he must think Ethel had
cooked it and, in the meantime, a week of tranquillity for
the family was assured.</p>

<p class='pindent'>An hour later she lay in Ruth’s bed, considering the
events of the past day. She thought of them, one by one,
extracting from them all their savour, whether sweet or
bitter. There was her walk on the hill overlooking the
water, with the bright tree showing through a grey mist
which seemed to darken when the wings of a swooping
gull flashed through it: there was the sound of unseen
ships hooting or booming at the turn of the river and,
at her will, she had been able to imagine them as huge
amphibians, calling to each other as they floundered in
the water and sought the hidden banks, or she could
acknowledge them as the sirens of ships which were
coming home from distant places or setting out on fresh
voyages, and standing up there with the soft rain on her
face, she had marvelled at the richness of human life in
which imagination could create strange beasts though
facts were sufficient in themselves, while she, who had the
privilege of these experiences, had no ache or pain in
the whole of her lithe body and no more troubles than
were good for her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She had a feeling of sovereignty while she stood there;
she could make what she liked of her world. She was more
than a sovereign; she was a magician, changing ships
into leviathans with some tiny adjustment of her brain,
and, in addition, she had a freedom such as, surely, no
one else in all Radstowe could claim, for she was in
possession of herself and did not set too great a value
on it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In this high mood, she had swung down from her perch
above the rocks and kept her fine content until she came
upon Ruth, near Regent Square, and remembered her old
ulster and realized, with a pang, that a part of her belonged
to Ruth. She had given it willingly and could not withdraw
it and she had increased her gift before the day was over.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It had been the most eventful day of her sojourn with
the Corders and, in an existence like hers, where excitements
outside herself came seldom, it seemed wasteful to
have such a walk, to seal her friendship with Ruth, interview
Mr. Blenkinsop, witness Ethel’s abandonment and
Doris’s impudence, talk to Mr. Samson over the hedge
and get a compliment from Robert Corder and news about
a minister, in one day.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘This is extravagance,’ she murmured.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There were no more sounds from Ethel’s room, and as
Hannah turned on her other side to sleep, she saw that
the door communicating with Robert Corder’s room was
framed in gold. Then that border slowly changed its
shape, widening at the top and side, and his figure was
silhouetted against the light. She lay still and stiff and
shut her eyes. She heard him advance a step and felt his
silent, swift retreat. He shut the door as quietly as he had
opened it and the gold band was round it, as though it
had never stirred.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What will he make of this?’ she wondered, pressing
her mouth against the pillow. There would be trouble
in the morning, but it would be something to tell Lilla
when she paid her call, avoiding the first Friday of the
month. Yes, with some amplifications, it would make a
very good story, and while she amplified it and planned
a fit and reasonable reply to any complaint Robert Corder
might make, she felt a new kindness for a man who
could steal into a room so gently to look at his little
daughter.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XVII</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>The shadow that fell on Hannah the next morning was not
the one of Robert Corder’s displeasure. It was a darker one
that hung over her all the week and, on the evening of
the supper-party, she slipped out of the house and walked
swiftly up the road. At the top of it, she stood still and,
drawing a deep breath, looked back. The road was empty.
There was nothing to be seen, and she had not expected
to see anything, except the lighted windows of the houses
and the street lamps which stood like sentinels who were
tired of keeping unnecessary watch and did not recognise
a fugitive in Miss Mole, and there was no one to notice
her as she paused with her back against the railings of a
garden and a wry smile on her lips. She was thinking
that, until this moment, she had not run away from anything
since the days when she had believed in the clever
bear and pretended a wolf was coming after her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Drat the man!’ she said, recovering her jauntiness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She had shut her door in his face, ten years ago, and
that was a heartening memory, and if she avoided him
now it was for reasons which he would be the last person
to understand. And, if she had stayed, what a pleasantly-shocking
little talk he and Robert Corder, closeted in the
study, would have had about her! She could imagine
the shakings of heads over Mr. Pilgrim’s revelations, the
pursings of lips, and Robert Corder’s sudden, angry
realisation that he would have to face an awkward situation.
She had spared him that, for the present, and it
had been easier than she dared to hope when the name of
Mr. Pilgrim fell blastingly on her ears. It was Mr.
Pilgrim for whom she had been so ready to kill the fatted
calf—but it was she who was the prodigal! It was he who
was the eligible bachelor of her hopes and, characteristically,
she had time to be sorry for Ethel before she
began to consider herself. Even Ethel could hardly be
enthusiastic about Mr. Pilgrim after she had seen him,
and Ruth and Wilfrid were already in dismay at the
prospect of an evening with a strange minister. They
enraged Ethel with their prophecies of how he would look
and what he would say and, in spite of Hannah’s distress,
she longed to prompt them. They wondered if he would
be content to discuss ministerial affairs with Robert
Corder, a possibility at which Ethel rolled anxious eyes,
or whether they would be expected to help in his entertainment,
and it was then that Wilfrid opened the door for
Hannah by thanking his God they had her to rely on.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And if he’s not the man I take him for, he’ll think she’s
a rare bird to find in Beresford Road. But if he is, and
I’m afraid he is, then it will be she who’ll get all the fun.
So you’ll enjoy yourself, Mona Lisa, if no one else does,
and you must do your best for us.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ethel was affronted as, no doubt, Wilfrid meant her
to be, and her anger against him, assuaged by the imminence
of Mr. Pilgrim, returned in force. She had been
keeping her father’s house, she reminded him, for the
last two years and this was not the first time they had
received a guest. He was trying to make Miss Mole
think she did not know how to behave—he was always
praising some one to annoy somebody else—and, as a
matter of fact, it would be easier for her without Miss
Mole. It was very difficult to be the hostess when there
was another woman there, older than oneself. It made her
nervous. They had had the Spenser-Smiths to supper
and Mrs. Spenser-Smith had said how nice everything
had been.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That was because she talked all the time. This Pilgrim
fellow may stammer, or something, and then the uncle
will have to do the talking and that’ll be the last visit
Pilgrim pays here. You mark my words! It’s better to
have Miss Mole in the hand than to drive Pilgrim into
the bush.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, how horrid you are!’ Ethel cried. ‘Of course he
doesn’t stammer. How could he preach?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps he can’t.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And you’re disgusting about Father, and perfectly
ridiculous about Miss Mole.’ Ethel’s voice was getting
beyond control. ‘Why should you think she’s such a
brilliant conversationalist? I’ve never noticed it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah, she’s like old Samson’s parrot. She can do it
when she chooses. But then, I know I’m prejudiced about
her.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah raised her head from her darning and looked
coolly from one to the other. ‘I don’t know what your
manners will be like on Thursday,’ she said quietly, ‘but
I hope they won’t be what they are now. You needn’t
continue the discussion because I happen to be engaged
that evening.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, I say, what luck! Can’t you be engaged to me?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But, Miss Mole—’ Ethel began and her face was stilled
by her rapid calculations.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If you’re thinking about the cooking, you needn’t
worry about that. I shall leave the supper prepared and,
as you say, it will be easier for you without me, and for
everybody else.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It won’t. It’ll be much worse,’ Ruth muttered, and
Ethel, preoccupied with a new thought, could only dart
a glance at this second ally of Miss Mole’s before she
asked—‘But what will Father think?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t know,’ Hannah replied simply.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And I don’t mean to be rude, Miss Mole—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But you succeeded,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m sorry, Miss Mole. It was only because Wilfrid
made me so angry. And I don’t think Father will like it.
And suppose Doris makes mistakes?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘She will,’ Hannah said pleasantly, and she could have
added the assurance that Mr. Pilgrim would not know.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was clear that her mind was made up and though
Robert Corder resented Miss Mole’s engagement, in a
place unnamed, and let her know it, he also let her know,
but without intention, that he was secretly relieved, for a
housekeeper, like a son at Oxford, was a good thing to
mention casually, but an irritation in the flesh, when she
happened to have a trick of misinterpreting the most
obvious remarks. It was this which had obliged him to
ignore his discovery of her in Ruth’s bedroom and he
felt mentally securer when she was out of the house.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She could divine all this with the acuteness which was
partly natural and partly an acquired habit of self-defence,
she could see him on the brink of asking what her
engagement might be and retiring, as usual, under cover
of some unnecessary orders, and now, just before the
guest was due, she had run up the street to find a temporary
refuge with Mrs. Gibson.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As she turned into Prince’s Road she reflected sagely
on the sequence of events and the difficulty of deciding
that this one was good and that one evil. If she had not
deceived Mrs. Widdows and gone out to buy the reel of
silk, she could not have saved Mr. Ridding’s life, and
while Mr. Blenkinsop seemed to regret this preservation,
it had been the means of providing Hannah with a shelter
in her time of need. It was impossible to please everybody,
and even the menace of Mr. Pilgrim, which had been
darkening her life for the past week, might prove to be
one of those clouds with a silver lining, but no one could
really know until the end of time, when each little action
and its consequence would be balanced in the scales, and
she was sure the adjudicator would not be aggrieved,
though he might be astonished, at the result. She was
conscious in herself of a tolerance which must be a dim
reflection of a greater one; she refused to be harsher with
herself than she was with other people or than her vague
but tender God was with all the world, and she had recovered
her spirits when she saw the lighted window of
Mrs. Ridding’s basement kitchen and rang the bell of
Mrs. Gibson’s front door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was always a strangely muffled feeling in that
house. If there was still trouble in the basement, it did
not penetrate into Mrs. Gibson’s comfortably-furnished
rooms, and as Hannah ate her supper and listened to
Mrs. Gibson’s gentle and contented talk, she felt as
though she were under the influence of some mild narcotic.
Mrs. Gibson’s voice rose only when she pressed
Hannah to eat. She thought Miss Mole was looking
tired. She had been out to choose the chicken herself and
Miss Mole must eat as much as she could.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’re a lady, Mrs. Gibson, if ever there was one,’
Hannah said. ‘I don’t know anybody else who would
have taken so much trouble for me.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, my dear!’ Mrs. Gibson exclaimed. It saddened
and flattered her to think this was true.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ Hannah went on, ‘if Mrs. Spenser-Smith had
asked me out to supper, she would have given me yesterday’s
mutton hashed. Quite good enough for Miss Mole!
She’d keep her chickens for the people who could afford
them. It’s the way of the world, but you don’t belong to
it. You ought to be in Heaven, Mrs. Gibson, and I hope
you won’t go yet. You had all this to see to and Mr.
Blenkinsop’s dinner as well.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Gibson nodded her head in satisfaction. ‘Mr.
Blenkinsop was very obliging when I told him you were
coming. He said he’d have his dinner early and then it
would be out of the way.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah,’ said Hannah, ‘he was afraid I’d take it up to
him!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t know, dear. He’s got a kind heart, really.
What do you think he did on Sunday? Took Mr. Ridding
off for a walk in the country!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And lost him?’ Hannah suggested.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, dear. Mr. Blenkinsop isn’t the man to lose things.
He’s very careful. If there’s a collar missing, he knows
it, and he’ll get Sarah to tighten up his trouser-buttons
when they’re nowhere near coming off.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I call that very delicate,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, but it vexes the girl sometimes, though I must
say he makes it worth her while. Well, off they went
with a packet of bread and cheese apiece, and they didn’t
come back till dark. It would do Mr. Ridding good, he
said, and give that poor little thing a bit of a rest.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Is that what he called her?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s what I call her myself.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And how did he know she needed a rest?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Anybody that looks at her can see that,’ Mrs. Gibson
said. ‘She’s always putting the baby in his pram when
Mr. Blenkinsop goes off to business. I thought there
might be trouble about that. “Leave him out at the back,”
I said to her, but she said how was she to hear him crying
when she was in the kitchen, so we risked it—behind the
bushes—and Mr. Blenkinsop hasn’t made any complaint,
though prams weren’t what he expected when he came
here.’ She sighed gently. ‘And I didn’t expect them
myself. But things are going on very comfortably and we
must hope for the best. Now, Sarah’s going to clear away,
and we’ll have a nice cosy time by the fire.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>At half-past nine Mrs. Gibson had begun to nod and
Hannah knew it was time for her to go. She went upstairs
to fetch her coat and hat, wondering how she should
spend the hour before it was safe to return to Beresford
Road. She decided to walk round the hill and down the
Avenue and see how many leaves were hanging on the
trees and, if Mr. Pilgrim still lingered, she might be able
to get upstairs and into her nightgown before she was
seen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She felt rather desolate and she felt angry. She was
sacrificing some of her independence to that man whom
she ought to have outfaced, but she could not have him
defiling the poor little remains of her romance, and she
did not want to be separated from Ruth. Which of these
motives was the stronger, she did not know. She kept
the memory of her short-lived happiness in a place of
its own, which was all she could do for it; she rarely looked
at it, but she would keep prying eyes from it, if she could,
and the memory of Ruth’s thin face, at once so childish
and so mature, seemed to encourage and commend her.
Nevertheless, she was conscious of the loneliness, in
which she pretended to rejoice, when, through his open
door, she saw the warm glow of Mr. Blenkinsop’s shaded
lamps cast on the dark landing. He was not the man to
sit in a room with the door open and, before he came
back, there would be time, she thought, for a peep.
It would suit her acid humour to see in what comfort
Mr. Blenkinsop passed his evenings, while Hannah Mole,
threatened by her past, had to wander in the streets.
In the unlikely possibility of Mr. Blenkinsop’s having a past
he need not be afraid of it. He had, according to Mrs.
Gibson, a nice little income from his mother, and he was
a man, and to men a past could be forgiven, even, if
repentance followed, by a Nonconformist minister, while
Hannah was a woman for whom repentance had no
practical results. In this unfairness, she found what
consolation she needed, for though what she had done
was folly, it had been done fearlessly and she was too
proud to feel regret.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She was advancing for her peep when Mr. Blenkinsop
appeared in the doorway. ‘I thought that was your step
on the stairs,’ he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And I did my best not to make a sound! I know you
don’t like being disturbed.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s quicker than other people’s,’ he said, ‘and, as a
matter of fact, I was just going to have a little walk. I
generally have one at this time of night, so perhaps you’ll
allow me to see you home.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I wasn’t going home, as you call it, yet,’ she said.
‘When I have a night out I make the most of it. I’m
going round the hill and down the Avenue.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t think you ought to do that alone.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I shan’t be alone if I’m with you. But no!’ she cried
repentantly, ‘I won’t spoil your walk. I’ll go by myself.
Let’s start at opposite ends and I’ll meet you at the top
of Beresford Road, to show you I’m not murdered, and
you can deliver me at the door.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That would be a very silly thing to do,’ he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I like doing silly things.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And I don’t,’ he said firmly, following her down the
stairs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah, you ought to learn,’ she said, seeing him plainly
now, in the light of the hall, and she thought he looked
too set and stolid to learn anything she could teach him.
Spectacled and grave, he waited while she said good night
to Mrs. Gibson, and they set off together without a word.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah found it difficult to talk to Mr. Blenkinsop
when she could not see his face. The sight of it made her
feel merry and ready to be absurd; his mere bulk, keeping
pace with hers, deadened her faculties, and he seemed to
have nothing to say himself. In silence they crossed
Regent Square and went through the little alley to the
street where stately Georgian houses began when the
shops ended, and so reached the Green, and the lamps
lighting the little paths.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I think this is much sillier than walking separately,’
Hannah said and, looking up at him, she had the gratification
of seeing him smile unwillingly. The smile only
lasted for a moment.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But you are safer,’ he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If you want to be safe, you’d better be dead.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t agree with you,’ Mr. Blenkinsop said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Good! Let’s argue about it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t see anything to argue about.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then tell me about the Riddings.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’re very curious about the Riddings.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Of course I am. Are you teaching him to play chess?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Blenkinsop cleared his throat. ‘Yes, I’m trying,’
he said bashfully, and then, angrily, as though it were
Hannah’s fault, he exclaimed, ‘That girl will break down
herself, if she doesn’t get some relief!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah was content to be silent for the rest of the walk.
She had plenty to think about and so, apparently, had
Mr. Blenkinsop, and she believed they were both thinking
of Mrs. Ridding; and though, apart from her interesting
thoughts, it was, as she had said, a silly walk, she enjoyed
the feeling of his unnecessary protection and she was
touched by his courtesy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When she parted from him at the gate, she saw that
the doorstep was illumined as it could not be unless
the door was open, and in the hall she found Mr. Corder.
She had feared to find Mr. Pilgrim too, and her smile of
relief was a new thing to the minister.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I have just been out to look for you,’ he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘How kind of you! Then I suppose you saw me coming
down the road with Mr. Blenkinsop.’ He had not expected
this frankness and she felt that he was disappointed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Mr. Blenkinsop?’ he repeated.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes. I’ve spent the evening with Mrs. Gibson and
Mr. Blenkinsop saw me home.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah, Mrs. Gibson. I hope you had a pleasant time.
Don’t trouble about my tea, Miss Mole. I have had to
make it myself.’</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XVIII</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>A fortnight later Hannah walked across the downs to
pay her call on Lilla. Robert Corder had again reminded
her of this duty and she was willing enough to perform it.
The shadow cast by Mr. Pilgrim had receded, and though
she could still see it like a storm-cloud that might, or
might not, break, the sky immediately above her was
clear and she felt light-hearted. She had found something
very whimsical in the comparative indifference of the
family towards a visit which, to her, had been so portentous.
At breakfast, the next morning, Robert Corder
had made some of those kindly, disparaging remarks of
which he was a master. He hoped Mr. Pilgrim would not
find city life too much for him after the less exacting
demands of the country: fortunately for him, the chapel
was a small one, with a congregation of simple-minded
people and no intellectual influence there, or in the wider
interests of Radstowe, would be expected of him. In
other words, though he did not use them, Mr. Pilgrim
was not likely to sit on any committees with Robert
Corder.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wilfrid’s glance at Hannah was a comment on these
bland remarks and a description of the evening’s entertainment.
Ethel looked thoughtful and subdued and
Ruth was occupied with a letter which was spread out
on her knee and sheltered by the table.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When she looked up her face was radiant. ‘Uncle
Jim’s coming for Christmas!’ she cried.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Indeed?’ Robert Corder said coldly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Good man,’ Wilfrid muttered, and Ethel, whose
pleasure was spoilt by the fact that Ruth conveyed it,
turned to him sharply, saying, ‘He’s no relation of
yours!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That’s why I like him,’ Wilfrid retorted.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This little flurry passed unnoticed by Robert Corder.
He was looking hurt. ‘I have heard nothing about this
visit,’ he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, but you will. He’s going to write to you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Is that a letter from him?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ said Ruth, ready to protect it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I never ask to see your letters, as you know,’ her father
said, and waited unsuccessfully for a moment. ‘But I
think it would have been better if he had written to me
first, and I don’t know that it will be convenient to have
him. You must remember that we have a room less than
we had last time he came, and there will be Howard at
home, too. There will be extra mouths to cook for and
I think Miss Mole ought to be considered in this matter.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, Moley—!’ Ruth exclaimed, and turned scarlet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Here was another annoyance for Robert Corder. ‘That
is not the way to address Miss Mole,’ he said. ‘Miss
Mole, I would rather you did not allow it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But she doesn’t! I mean—it just slipped out. Miss
Mole, two people wouldn’t make such a terrible lot of
difference, would they?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘With due notice, I can feed a regiment,’ Hannah said
grandly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘There!’ said Ruth, looking at her father boldly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Of course she can,’ said Ethel, less in support of Ruth
than in depreciation of Miss Mole. ‘I’ve done it myself
and nobody thought anything of it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, we did. We thought a lot, because we couldn’t eat
the Christmas puddings. You didn’t fill the basins and
the water got in. Don’t you remember?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ruthie, Ruthie, that isn’t kind. Ethel did her best.
Now don’t get excited, but run off to school or you’ll be
late.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I am excited and there’s plenty of time. And
Wilfrid will be away for the Christmas days and you know
you always make him and Howard share a room when
they’re here together, and what difference will Uncle Jim
make? You can’t not have him, when it’s the first Christmas
he’s had at home for years. But it won’t be the last!
He’s left the sea!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Left the sea?’ Robert Corder repeated, and he looked
towards the letter which Ruth was putting in her pocket.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Retired,’ said Ruth, enjoying her private information.
‘He says he thinks he’ll buy a little farm,’ and she disappeared
before her father could make it difficult for her
to keep her letter to herself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, well,’ he said, tolerantly, ‘I suppose we must
forgive a bluff sailor for his rough and ready manners.
No doubt I shall hear from him before long.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And you’ll let him come, won’t you?’ Ethel begged.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Robert Corder decided to become the indulgent father.
‘I see I shall have an unhappy Christmas if I don’t,’ he
said playfully and Hannah made a mental note of this
weakness which, in anyone else, she might have called
amiability.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was plain that he did not care for Uncle Jim, who
was Mrs. Corder’s brother and, with Mr. Blenkinsop’s
affairs already developing in her mind, Hannah began
busying herself with Uncle Jim, his sister and her husband,
and seeking any information she could get, though she
could manage very well without it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>While she crossed the downs, keeping to the paths for
the sake of Lilla’s carpets, thinking that a grey sky was
lovelier than a blue one, that the bare trees were exquisite
against it and that the proper place for leaves was the
ground, she was imagining little past scenes between Uncle
Jim and Robert Corder, and clumsily tender ones between
Mr. Blenkinsop and Mrs. Ridding. She did not trouble
about the construction of her dramas: she saw pictures
and framed sentences; she saw Uncle Jim with a protective
arm round his sister’s waist and heard Mr. Blenkinsop
saying solemnly, ‘Yes, since that very first evening—’
She imagined Uncle Jim as a modern buccaneer, bronzed
and bearded, and though she feared he would not actually
have rings in his ears, it would be surprising not to see
them there, and suddenly, the actors in her little scenes
became Uncle Jim and herself. Those flashing eyes of
his pierced below her plain exterior and recognised a
kindred spirit, and he would carry her off to sea, for
really, it was absurd for a sailor to think he could turn
farmer, but, if he persisted, she would be there to help
him, and they would adopt Ruth and live happy ever
after.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘H’m,’ Hannah said in self-derision. She had arrived
at Lilla’s chains and posts, and the windows of the red
and white house were looking at her with coldly-practical
eyes. Her fancies could not live under that gaze. The
bold buccaneer would choose a buxom wench for partner;
Miss Mole must continue to trust in the rich old
gentleman, and she was wondering whether Lilla knew
anything about Mr. Samson, when the severe parlourmaid
opened the door and, making no mistake this time,
took Hannah to the drawing-room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’re looking very well, Hannah,’ Lilla said, taking
the credit to herself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And you’re looking more like a robin than ever, dear,’
Hannah said, making the usual peck at her cousin’s
cheek. ‘It’s nice to see you in your natural habitat, or
whatever they call it. You have such an exalted expression
in chapel that I hardly know you, though of course,
I’m proud of our slight acquaintance.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Now, don’t begin your nonsense, but tell me how
you’re getting on.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I shouldn’t like to boast,’ Hannah said, ‘until I hear
what Mr. Corder has told you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Very little. Naturally, as I recommended you, he
wouldn’t like to make any complaints to me. And, perhaps,
there are none to make,’ she added generously. ‘How do
you think you are managing yourself?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Splendidly! Almost too well, I’m sometimes afraid.
I’m glad to have you to confide in, Lilla. I’m rather
worried and I want your advice.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then it’s the first time you’ve wanted anybody’s,’
Lilla said drily, and her bright eyes hardened with
suspicion.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Thank God, I’ve never had the same need to!’ Hannah
exclaimed. ‘You’ll hardly believe me, Lilla——’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You may be sure of that, but, whatever it is, just
talk about something else till the tea has come in.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ said Hannah, ‘that’s the kind of thing it is. And
I hope it’s a good tea, because I’ve been rather mean with
ours lately. Saving up for Christmas. We’re going to
have Mrs. Corder’s brother with us. Do you know anything
about him?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I believe he’s a sailor of some sort. I think he calls
himself a captain, but not, of course, in the Navy.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, if he had been, I should have heard of it. I don’t
much mind about his profession. It’s his character, his
impressionability, his income, I’m after. And his age.
That’s rather important, but he can hardly be a stripling.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Really, Hannah—Now, let me show you these little
bags I’m making for Christmas presents,’ she said brightly
as the maid came in. ‘Pretty, aren’t they?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Very pretty,’ Hannah said, wondering which one she
would get. Lilla’s presents to people like herself would
be of the hashed-mutton variety, and Hannah was glad.
A handsome present from Lilla would have been difficult
to accept and, so far, she had not been put to that inconvenience.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I thought one of these would do very well for Ethel
Corder.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘She’d love it, but give her a gaudy one, and put a
modest little cheque inside.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t think I need reminding of that,’ Lilla said
coldly. ‘First and last, I do a good deal for the Corders.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And Ethel’s devoted to you. If I wasn’t devoted to
you myself, I should get rather tired of hearing your name.
And little does she suspect that you and I were practically
fed at the same bosom. Figuratively speaking,
Lilla, figuratively speaking! And I’ve heard Mr. Corder
use that expression himself.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not about human beings,’ Lilla said, ‘and I don’t
like it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But between us girls!’ Hannah protested mildly.
‘You must give me a little licence, and that reminds me
of another thing I want to ask you. Do you know an old
man called Samson, who lives next door to us in Beresford
Road? Keeps a parrot and dozens of cats.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ve heard the parrot and a very objectionable noise
it makes. Isn’t he a common old man with a red face?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, gloriously common,’ Hannah said. ‘That’s why
I like him. I’m common myself. There’s no need to
think before you speak, with him. It does me good.
I’ve made friends with him, Lilla, you won’t be surprised
to hear. He’s had bronchitis lately, and I’ve been doing
his shopping for him, and if there are any coppers in his
change he lets me keep them for my trouble, on condition
that I don’t put them in the plate on Sunday.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then, if that’s the truth, and I don’t suppose it is,
I think you’re very unwise. Isn’t there anybody else to
do it for him?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not a soul, poor old dear. He looks after the house
himself, and very neat and clean it is, in spite of the cats.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then it’s still more unwise, but, of course, I don’t
really believe you’d take the man’s money.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That the truest part of a perfectly true tale. Funny,
isn’t it? It pleases him and I don’t mind a bit. It doesn’t
often come to more than twopence halfpenny, because
I do some juggling with sixpences and threepenny-bits.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, you’d better be careful. You were not engaged to
look after the neighbours and, from what I remember of
the man, I don’t think Mr. Corder would approve of the
acquaintance.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah,’ said Hannah, ‘that’s where I score. I happen to
have a trump card up my sleeve and out it will come when
it’s wanted, I confess I’m looking forward to the moment.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, well,’ Lilla sighed, ‘it’s no good talking to you.
You’ll go your own way and you’ll come to grief and it
will be most unpleasant for me.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘We have to bear each other’s burdens, dear,’ Hannah
said quietly. ‘And I’ll have another crumpet, if I may.
They’re so beautifully buttery.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Very indigestible, I’m afraid. I daren’t touch them.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And a crumpet that isn’t swimming in butter is about
as much use as a ship in dry dock. I’ll try that little
aphorism on Uncle Jim—if it is an aphorism. I’ll look it
up. If you want to give me a Christmas present, Lilla,
give me a dictionary.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Mr. Corder must have dozens of dictionaries.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, they’re not mine—yet,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Lilla pretended not to hear this remark. ‘I’m going to
give you one of these little bags. And now,’ Hannah was
waiting for this, ‘what do you want my advice about?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, no, I’m not going to worry you, but,’ she leaned
forward eagerly, ‘I must just ask you one question.
Have you ever heard that Mr. Corder walks in his sleep?
That’s my one hope, Lilla. Did Mrs. Corder ever complain
of that, among other things?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Mrs. Corder never complained of anything. Why
should she?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘There’s a skeleton in every cupboard. Now I wonder
how that saying arose. We go on, using these expressions,
part of our common heritage, Lilla——’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I wish you wouldn’t harp so much on being common,
but just keep the fact to yourself.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah put down her cup with a shaking hand.
‘You shouldn’t make me laugh when I’m drinking. Oh,
Lilla, what a treasure you are! All right, I won’t. But it’s
part of our heritage, all the same, and neither you nor
I know where it comes from. Now, the kind of dictionary
I want is the kind that will tell me things like that. I’m
afraid it will be rather expensive.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t see what you want with a dictionary, and I
haven’t a skeleton in my cupboard and I don’t believe
there’s one in Robert Corder’s. You’d better speak
plainly, Hannah.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ll speak as plainly as I can without being improper,
though, really it wasn’t so very improper because I pretended
to be asleep, as any nice woman would, but
imagine my horror when Mr. Corder opened my bedroom
door and came and had a look at me. It wasn’t a long look,
and I don’t wonder, but a look it was! Now, how can you
explain that?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I can’t,’ Lilla said slowly, ‘but I’m sure you can. It’s
no good trying those tricks on me, Hannah, and if it had
really happened you wouldn’t have told me. I hope you
won’t try them on anyone else. In the first place, they’re
vulgar and, in the second, they’re not funny.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah looked disappointed. ‘I thought it was very
funny at the time. I must have told it badly. I haven’t
been very successful with my stories lately. And it would
have been funnier still if I’d just opened an eye and winked
at him. I meant to put that in when I told you and I
forgot. Well, I must go back and call on Mr. Samson.
He would have seen the joke. The good jokes, Lilla, are
the ones in which character and circumstances conflict
humorously and Mr. Samson would appreciate this one.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘For goodness sake, don’t tell him!’ Lilla exclaimed.
‘If he thinks you’re that kind of woman——’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘He knows exactly what kind of woman I am, which is
more than you do, Lilla dear.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But what’s the real explanation?’ Lilla asked, almost
wistfully.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Family secrets, family secrets!’ Hannah said. ‘I’ve
kept yours and I’m going to keep the Corders’.’</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XIX</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>It was pleasant to see Ruth looking happier and Hannah
subdued a sort of jealousy of Uncle Jim, whose advent
had succeeded where her own presence had failed, and
she determined to be happy too. It was pure wastefulness
to spoil the present because the future might hold trouble,
and everything conspired to help her. Ruth was less
quarrelsome with Ethel, and Ethel, perhaps exhausted by
her outburst, seemed more peaceful and more enthusiastic
about the club, though Doris had definitely deserted it in
favour of her young man. There were Christmas festivities
to be arranged, both there and at the chapel and,
when she chose, Ethel could be as thorough in her work
as in her grief. Hannah herself had more than enough to
do with her own preparations, but she found time for a
visit to Mr. Samson, now and then. That disreputable-looking
old gentleman, who seemed to have been all over
the world and to have tried all trades, who distrusted all
men and most women with a good-humoured cynicism,
whose chief prejudice was against parsons of every
denomination and who had settled down in Beresford
Road as though in obedience to some unsuspected craving
for respectability, was the perfect antidote to Robert
Corder. He was, in fact, in many ways, what Hannah
would have been if she had been a man, and in his freedom
from any received set of opinions, in his loose, but not
offensive, tongue, in the stories he told her and, above
all, in his appreciation of herself, she found a relief which,
no doubt, had its subtle effect on the Corder household.
Her demon of mischief, getting its exercise in talking to
Mr. Samson and provoking his thick chuckle of amusement,
had a less persistent desire to tease Robert Corder.
It was impossible to resist puzzling him when the opportunity
came, but she did not go out of her way to do it,
and she could feel that he was inclining to think of her as
the right woman in the right place. This, in itself, was
irritating, but the contrast between his view and Mr.
Samson’s, between the careful face Robert Corder knew
and the one she could show Mr. Samson, between the
self-conscious propriety of the minister and the old man’s
lively disregard of it, was a secret delight. If Mr. Samson’s
stories were true, he had known many women intimately;
he talked of marriage with knowledge, though he did not
mention a wife, and whatever his experiences had really
been, they had produced what, to Hannah, seemed a sane
apprehension of the relationship between men and women,
giving due, and often humorous, importance to its
physical side, but accepting it as naturally as he accepted
food, and refusing to make a definite cleavage between
male and female, anywhere. Mr. Samson, clearly, had
not deliberately thought this out, nor did he express his
opinions: like his red, puffy face and his wicked old eyes,
they were the fruit of life as he had lived it, and though
the fruit was ripe, it was not rotten. Ruth need have had
no fear of him; indeed, as Hannah discovered, she had
every cause to trust him, and Hannah herself could enjoy
his approval of her remarkably neat legs and feet without
feeling obliged to assure him of her inherent modesty.
Hannah had no modesty in Robert Corder’s sense which
implied a perpetual and restraining consciousness of her
sex. She was not anxious to forget it; she was as feminine
as any one else and she had suffered too much from being
treated as a machine, but she was a human being more
abundantly than she was a woman, and this was what Mr.
Samson understood.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She had her superstitious moments when she feared
she had too many sources of happiness. She had the
friendship of Wilfrid and Ruth and Mr. Samson, she was
looking forward to the arrival of Howard and Uncle
Jim, and she had Mr. Samson’s stories to remember and
her own to concoct. These were a pleasant accompaniment
to her household tasks. She could read when she
was in bed, and she read late into every night at the
expense of Robert Corder’s candles, but while she stoned
the raisins for the Christmas puddings, dusted or darned,
she was busy with her own romances in which sometimes
Robert Corder and his wife, sometimes the bold buccaneer
and herself were the chief actors or, more often, Mr.
Blenkinsop struggled with the puzzling emotions she had
created for him. She took most pleasure in the Blenkinsop
story, for she could make it either comic or pathetic, and
Mr. Blenkinsop was a subject to her taste. She could
see the man who believed in safety being drawn into
those dangerous, dim regions of pity where, as he groped
his way, he would suddenly find himself on the frontier of
a world still more dangerous and more attractive. As
Mrs. Gibson said, he had a kind heart and it was touched
by that spectacle of a slip of a girl pretending she had no
troubles. Hannah, too, felt every admiration for Mrs.
Ridding, but Mrs. Ridding had a baby, and a neurotic
husband was a price worth paying for it. For the sake of
one good baby, Hannah would have paid more than that
and there were times when she felt vexed with Mr.
Blenkinsop. Because Mrs. Ridding was the first woman
of his acquaintance who had faced a difficult situation
bravely, he would naturally think she was the only one
there was and, flattered by the belief that he had made
this discovery for himself, he was ready to credit her
with every other good quality, as a man, finding a new
continent, would refuse to see a fault in it. She could
now understand his resentment at the unnecessary
preservation of Mr. Ridding, yet—here was the vicious
circle again—if Mr. Ridding had been left to die, Mrs.
Ridding would, in all likelihood, have disappeared from
Prince’s Road or, if she had remained, Mr. Blenkinsop
would have considered her fortunate and taken no further
interest in her, and it seemed to Hannah that her own
mistake in life, always had been, and still was, her refusal
to feel any sorrow for herself or to suggest herself as a
subject for sorrow in other people. In her attempts
to attract Mr. Blenkinsop’s attention, with sprightliness,
intellect and ignorance, she had omitted the one method
which would have been successful. Then she caught
sight of her image in the glass and remembered that
pathos without beauty is merely irritating, that a woman
with a long nose could not be touching in her sadness,
and at this point she neglected her stories for philosophical
speculations on the effect of noses on destiny. In women,
the perfect nose, in its appearance and its effects, was
rather delicately cut, and very delicately tilted, while the
suspicion of a droop had a tendency to produce tragedy
unless its owner was a determined person, like herself.
She had no theories about men’s noses. In the
comparative unimportance of a man’s features, she
reluctantly found proof of some sort of superiority in
the other sex, and when she tried to remember the details
of Mr. Blenkinsop’s face, she could recall no more than
a clear skin, an impression of solid worth and a pair of
spectacles.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She was as glad, then, as she was astonished, when, on
another Wednesday night, he gave her an opportunity
to look at him. She was alone in the house, for Ruth was
at some school festivity and Hannah was working at a party
frock which was to be a surprise for her. One of Ruth’s
objections to the Spenser-Smiths’ parties was the inadequacy
of her clothes and the grandeur of Margery Spenser-Smith’s,
and Hannah, who had known worse than inadequacy
in her own, was determined that her child should
be as prettily dressed as Lilla’s.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She frowned at the interruption when the bell rang,
but she smiled when she saw Mr. Blenkinsop. ‘You have
a very bad memory,’ she told him. ‘It’s Wednesday night
and Mr. Corder isn’t in.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Is anyone else at home?’ he enquired.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Only me,’ Hannah said. ‘Would you like to leave a
message?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’d rather come in, unless I shall be in the way.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not at all, and if you’re handy with your needle, I can
give you plenty to do. But I expect,’ she said, looking at
him gravely, ‘you can’t manage anything more complicated
than buttons.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I haven’t even got a needle. Mrs. Gibson makes that
unnecessary.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Mrs. Gibson spoils people. You’ll miss her when you
leave her.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the act of following Hannah into the dining-room,
Mr. Blenkinsop stood still. ‘Who said I was going to
leave her?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘There was a murmur about it, wasn’t there? A kind
of subterranean growl? Come and sit down. And I
thought you might have come to the conclusion that it
was the best thing to do. If I had a little capital, I’d
start a boarding house, for what they call single gentlemen,
myself, and I’d look after you like a mother, Mr. Blenkinsop.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I haven’t the slightest intention of leaving Mrs.
Gibson.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, well, Mr. Blenkinsop, you’re the best judge, of
course,’ she said primly, picking up her sewing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Certainly I am,’ he said stoutly. ‘And as for starting
a boarding house, that would be a very silly thing to do.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Why? If I can manage this family,’ Hannah said
impressively, ‘I should make child’s play of the single
gents.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’re too young,’ Mr. Blenkinsop said, frowning a
little.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Young!’ Hannah’s laughter, the sound which had
silenced Wilfrid’s whistling as he came down the street,
was like a mockery of her own derision. ‘Why, how old
do you think I am?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘About my own age, I suppose.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah shook her head. ‘Centuries older, Mr.
Blenkinsop. Perhaps only a few years, as we count time,
but while you’ve been behind your bars in the bank
I’ve been pushing my way into other people’s houses and
being pushed out again. Great fun!’ she added hastily.
‘I’d rather be allowed to run wild and pick up my living
than be kept in your gilded cage. And the only thing
I don’t like about Mr. Samson——.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Who’s Mr. Samson?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Nobody seems to know Mr. Samson and he’s an
extraordinary character. I really think I like him as well
as Robert Corder,’ Hannah said thoughtfully. ‘But he
keeps birds in cages, and you know about the robin
redbreast in a cage, don’t you, Mr. Blenkinsop? He puts
all Heaven in a rage and that’s how I feel when I think
of you in the bank. From the first moment I saw you,
looking through the kitchen window—I’m sorry, I didn’t
mean to refer to that again—you reminded me of a bird.
My favourite bird’ she said, but she would not tell
him what that was and, as she looked at him, she decided
that he was not so owlish as she had thought. The
spectacles gave him most of his solemnity, his firmly
shut mouth seemed to mark his determination to support
them, and Hannah wished she dared ask him to take
them off.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You talk a lot of nonsense, don’t you?’ he asked
patiently. ‘Does Mr. Corder understand it?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I shouldn’t think of trying to find out,’ she replied.
‘Mr. Corder’s mind moves in different spheres from mine
and I just accept the fact.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>She smiled trustfully at Mr. Blenkinsop, who said,
‘I should hope it does.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘So does Mr. Corder,’ Miss Mole said demurely and,
to her great surprise, Mr. Blenkinsop let out a modest
burst of laughter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I didn’t know you could do it,’ she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What?’ Mr. Blenkinsop asked, preparing to be
affronted.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I didn’t know you could laugh and I don’t know why
you did.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Because you meant me to,’ he said mournfully, ‘and
I haven’t had many chances.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You should make them.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And I’m worried.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah! Hannah said. ‘Can’t you balance the cash
properly, or whatever it is you do in a bank?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I can’t balance Mr. Corder’s religious views with my
own.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Is that all? Who could? I shouldn’t worry about that.
I doubt whether he knows what his are.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I’m a member of his church.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You can retire, I suppose?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m going to,’ said Mr. Blenkinsop. ‘When my mother
was alive, I let things drift. It didn’t seem worth while
to upset her, but lately I’ve come to the conclusion that
I’m not honest. The last sermon I heard him preach, on
the subject of marriage, well, to put it plainly, it made me
sick.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Too lax?’ Hannah suggested.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Too idiotic,’ Mr. Blenkinsop said resignedly, and
Hannah, taking a long time over her next stitch, asked
carefully, ‘When was it? I must have missed that one.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, one evening, a few weeks ago.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I see,’ Hannah said, and she paused in her work to
connect Mr. Blenkinsop’s views on marriage with the
complicated love affair of which she suspected him.
‘And you’ve come to-night to tell him what you think.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No. I don’t want to lose my temper. I’m going to
write to him. Argument would be a waste of time.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, I’m glad you’ve warned me. It will be a stormy
day, I’m afraid.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Will it really? I’m sorry. But don’t you think I ought
to do it?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t feel so keenly as you do about marriage, Mr.
Blenkinsop.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I didn’t say I felt particularly keenly.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, you didn’t say so,’ Hannah said, with an irritating
smile.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That simply happened to be the subject that brought
things to a head. I differ fundamentally from Mr. Corder
and the doctrines he has to teach.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Exactly,’ Hannah said, ‘so you’d better declare your
independence as quickly as possible. You’ll feel more
comfortable, won’t you? How’s the chess getting on?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I knew you’d ask that, sooner or later,’ he said, trying
not to smile.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And the country walks?’ Hannah persisted, ‘You want
to hide your light under a bushel, but Mrs. Gibson
brings it out. You’re doing good by stealth and blushing
to have it known.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No,’ said Mr. Blenkinsop with an effort, ‘I’m afraid
my motives are not altogether unselfish,’ and he looked
as if he would have said more if he had not heard someone
entering the hall.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah hastily put away her sewing and wished she
could do the same with Mr. Blenkinsop. ‘Every room,’
she said, looking at him with twinkling eyes, ‘ought to
have two doors. If this is Mr. Corder, what are you
going to do?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I shall say good evening and walk out.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And what about me?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘He won’t approve of finding a young spinster like me
alone in the house with a single gent.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then he’ll have to put up with it,’ Mr. Blenkinsop
said, and Hannah was telling him that so bold a spirit
was wasted on a bank when Robert Corder opened the
door.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XX</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Blenkinsop would have been more tactful and more
chivalrous if he had explained his presence by pretending
he had been waiting for this arrival. He did nothing of
the kind and, after shaking hands with Robert Corder,
he went away and Robert Corder, looking hurt, retired to
his study. It was his habit to go there at once, when he
came home, unless he heard sounds which roused his
curiosity, and he was very curious, from some other part
of the house, and Hannah wished she had instructed Mr.
Blenkinsop to talk in whispers. She was sorry his visit
had been cut short just as he was beginning to be interesting
and though it was a little puzzling that he should
seek her out, Hannah, who was not modest, could make
it natural enough. Mr. Blenkinsop, bewildered, and
troubled by a new situation, had instinctively turned to
the person who could understand it. And she could
understand everything, she thought, in a kind of ecstasy.
She knew that Robert Corder was now trying to decide
whether he should ask questions and risk the evasions
which he could not believe were snubs, or find the outlet
he wanted in a reprimand, and he would not know what
he was going to do until he saw her. That she would
presently witness the solution to this problem was some
compensation for Mr. Blenkinsop’s departure, and at a
suspicion of rebellion against the necessity for making
her visits to her old friend on the sly and receiving those
of her young one under the shadow of Robert Corder’s
displeasure, she reminded herself that these conditions
prevented dullness. There had been peace between her
and Robert Corder for the last two weeks and she told
herself that she had no wish to break the truce, but she
was not going to turn the other cheek: that was part of
his profession, not hers, and when she took his tea into
the study and saw him writing at his desk, she thought
he was obeying the command laid on him, for he raised
his head and thanked her, and she felt disappointed, but
until she was actually through the door, she could not be
sure he had nothing to say to her and it was when she was
about to turn the handle that she heard him speak in a
high, questioning tone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And Ruth?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ruth?’ Hannah repeated.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Have you forgotten that she is at the school concert
to-night? Or did you remember it very well?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Very well,’ Hannah replied.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I see. Well, Miss Mole, there is, of course, no objection
to your having visitors, as long as they don’t interfere
with your duties, but I thought it was understood that
you were to fetch Ruth.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>To be attacked on the subject of her duties which were
always punctiliously fulfilled, for, as Wilfrid said, she had
a professional conscience, to receive suggestions that she
was neglecting Ruth, was more than Miss Mole could
bear, and she made no effort to keep the anger out of her
voice as she replied quickly, ‘Then you made a mistake.
Wilfrid offered to fetch her for me.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That was very obliging of Wilfrid,’ Robert Corder
said smoothly, ‘but I don’t care to have my daughter’s
safety dependent on a young man who isn’t scrupulous
to keep his promises.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It isn’t too late to start now,’ Hannah said, with a
glance at the clock.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then, Miss Mole, I shall be glad if you will go.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m sorry to refuse, Mr. Corder, but I couldn’t insult
Wilfrid like that.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Wilfrid?’ he said coldly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That is what he has asked me to call him. I don’t
distrust him and I won’t behave as if I do.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But, at my request—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Mole shook her head, smiling as she would have
smiled at a child who could not be blamed for his
stupidity. ‘I wouldn’t kick a puppy at anyone’s request.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Puppy is a good word in this connection,’ he said, and
Hannah realised that his temper was very bad and that
though he seemed impervious to anything but petty
slights to his own dignity, he might have troubles worthy
of sympathy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It was an unfortunate word to use,’ she said lightly.
‘I meant any young thing. Wilfrid will keep his promise,
Mr. Corder, and Ruth will like being fetched by him.
It isn’t every girl who has such a handsome cousin.
And,’ she went on quickly, as he frowned, ‘your daughter
was anxious that the house should not be left.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And you were anxious to see Mr. Blenkinsop.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Mole was deaf to this interruption. ‘She didn’t
want Doris and her young man to be waiting about in
the street. I should have thought the atmosphere of
Beresford Road would have a sobering effect, much more
sobering than the Downs, where I suppose they wander.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Miss Mole, I dislike this sort of talk.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But they do it, you know.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And I was not aware that Doris,’ he overcame his
repugnance with difficulty, ‘that Doris had what you call
a young man.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, he’s quite young,’ Hannah said simply. ‘He’s the
grocer’s assistant. You see, when he called for orders——’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t wish to hear about it. I dislike the idea very
much.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, Doris isn’t particularly attractive, is she? I
shouldn’t have chosen her myself, but there’s no accounting
for tastes, as they say, and I think she has improved a
little under the influence of the grocer’s assistant’s love.
And he’s highly respectable—at least, they’ve both told
me so, and the grocer himself corroborates. I’ve made
enquiries. He’s rather a friend of mine.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You seem to make friends rather easily, Miss Mole.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, isn’t it lucky for me?’ she said brightly, and then, as
though she noticed his clouded brow for the first time, she
asked in her softest voice. ‘Have I done anything to annoy
you?’ and immediately perceived that the frontal attack
was the one for Robert Corder. A patch of red showed
on each cheek and he fidgeted with the papers on his desk.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I did hear something to-night which disturbed me a
little,’ he confessed, and Hannah, glad that he was not
looking at her, braced herself for the shock. ‘And then,’
he went on, ‘I am disappointed in Samuel Blenkinsop. He
neglects the chapel, but he visits my house when I am out
of it and goes off without a word. I don’t understand it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah’s body slackened suddenly and she found that all
her muscles ached. ‘Do you mind if I sit down?’ she asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I shan’t keep you a moment, Miss Mole, but yes, sit
down, of course. Can you tell me, as you seem so intimate
with Blenkinsop, whether I have offended him? I know,’
he said, smiling faintly, ‘that my views sometimes alarm
the more timid spirits in my congregation, but I always
welcome candid criticism.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Gazing at Robert Corder, Hannah forgot Mr. Blenkinsop.
This self-deception which, she could well believe,
was sincere, had startled her into the fear that her opinion
of herself was just as fond, and the world she had made
for herself, in which she was wise and witty, of wide
sympathies and an understanding heart, would have
slipped silently into ruins if she had not found a desperate
strength with which to prop it up. If it did not stand,
she would go under with it; she would have to admit
that Robert Corder was wrong in his dislike of her and
one of her pleasures was the conviction that he was right,
that she was too subtle for his comfort and too clear-sighted.
It would be terrible to have to own that, however
much they might differ, they had this bond of seeing
themselves as no other person could.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What is the matter, Miss Mole?’ he asked suavely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I was—thinking,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You are doubting,’ he said helpfully, ‘whether you are
justified in telling me.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No,’ said Hannah, ‘I’m afraid I’d forgotten all about
Mr. Blenkinsop.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘In other words, you were not listening to what I said.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Indeed I was, but it made me think of other things.’
She looked at him with the bright intelligence she kept
for him. ‘Isn’t that what conversation is for?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not as I understand it,’ he replied, and Hannah was
smilingly silent.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And now,’ she said, feeling that this was her moment,
while he was angry, ‘I hope you’ll tell me what you’ve
heard about me. For I can’t bear suspense,’ she added
truthfully.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No,’ he said coldly, ‘I prefer to try to forget it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, well, if you can forget it,’ she said, rising as the
door bell rang, ‘I shan’t worry about it either,’ but she
was not so easy as she appeared. She fancied that Robert
Corder’s way of forgetting things was to put them in some
safe place until he wanted them, and she knew that while
she watched for an obvious danger, another, unsuspected,
might creep up behind her. The obvious danger was Mr.
Pilgrim. He was not the only person who knew Hannah
Mole outside her professional capacity, but he was
close at hand and that very night she was to feel that he
was coming nearer, to hear his feet as she had heard
them, ten years ago, padding up her little garden path.
She had been angry then, but amused because she had
been happy: she was angrier now because that happiness
was only a little cherished dust, and it would need all her
skill and energy to keep it from being blown away by the
indignant breath of the sinless. It seemed hard that she
should not be allowed to keep it without fighting for it;
it was so frail a possession that, in the turmoil, she might
lose it, and in its frailty, if she had been given to pity
of herself, she would have seen her tragedy. She had no
memories which sustained her with their own strength;
it was she who had to be tender with the weak. She could
have faced the world with a glorious failure, but she must
hide this one, which had ended meanly, and she was ten
years older now and sometimes she was tired. She did not
want to be sent roving again, just yet: she wished, as she
had said, to make a good job of her undertaking, and the
happiness of these people was becoming important to
her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When she opened the door to Doris, she looked at her
sharply to see whether the course of her love was running
smooth, and the sight of her face, rosy with the kisses of
the grocer’s assistant, was a pleasant one.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Good girl,’ Hannah said. ‘It’s just striking ten. Have
you had a nice walk?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ve been to see his mother, Miss,’ Doris said proudly.
‘She was a bit stiff, but he says he thinks she’ll get used
to me.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, there!’ Hannah said in congratulation, and
watched one happy person go up to bed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The voices of Wilfrid and Ruth, who came in soon
afterwards, sounded happy, too, and Ethel, following
close on their heels, showed an excitement which roused
Hannah’s misgivings. Something had happened on which
she would raise expectations not to be fulfilled, and the
joyousness meant future trouble, but not until she began
her confidences, when Wilfrid and Ruth had gone to bed,
did Hannah understand that the chief part of the trouble
might be for herself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Pilgrim had been to the Girls’ Club. The one in
connection with his own chapel was ill-attended and badly
managed and he had gone to see how Miss Corder
managed hers. It appeared that he was delighted with
everything, he had given the girls a little address, and he
hoped Ethel would allow him to consult her again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘So I must help him if I can, mustn’t I, Miss Mole?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Practical experience is what he wants.’ Hannah said
briskly. ‘Let him go to the club and watch you do it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ Ethel said, a little doubtfully. ‘But you see,
Patsy Withers is generally there and she’s so interfering.
She wasn’t there to-night, or she would have made Mr.
Pilgrim think she runs the Club. And she’s so silly with
men. I thought I might ask him to tea one day.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah kept a silence which made Ethel anxious.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Don’t you think I might do that, Miss Mole?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well,’ Hannah said, ‘you know what family teas are.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ Ethel agreed again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And your father and he would have so much to say to
each other that I’m afraid you wouldn’t be able to help
him very much, And you wouldn’t be at your best.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘How do you mean—my best?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You wouldn’t speak with the same authority in the
bosom of your family.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh,’ Ethel said, and she looked and sounded disappointed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But,’ said Hannah quickly, easing her own conscience,
‘you mustn’t take my advice. You must do as
you think best.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I don’t know what that is!’ Ethel cried. ‘I thought
you’d help me. You know, Miss Mole, it’s dreadful,
sometimes, not to have a mother.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>There were tears in her eyes and Hannah thought of
Mrs. Corder, who trusted Miss Mole to do what she could.
‘Then I’ll tell you exactly what I think,’ she said quietly.
‘Do nothing until he speaks to you about it again.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But, perhaps, he never will!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I know,’ Hannah said, thinking now of all the women
who waited for the words they would not hear. ‘But if
he’s not in earnest about his work, it’s not for you to
remind him.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Isn’t it? But that’s just one of the ways where women
help.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not at this stage of your acquaintance.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I feel as if I’ve known him for a long time. You do
feel like that with some people, don’t you? He was so
friendly to-night. And I was wondering if we should
have a Christmas party, for Howard, you know.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’ll have to speak to your father about that,’ Hannah
said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She went very slowly up to bed and her feet felt heavy.
It was no use running from Mr. Pilgrim: dodge and double
as she might, he was bound to catch her in the end, but
if he caught Ethel at the same time, the loss to one might
be balanced by the gain to another, and that, after all,
was the only way to reckon. The world would gain
something from a happy Ethel—if such a man as Mr.
Pilgrim could make her happy—and Hannah Mole
would get something out of it, in spite of him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her thoughts had carried her past Ruth’s half open
door, but Ruth’s voice arrested them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Is that you, Miss Mole?’ she called cautiously. ‘I
thought it might be Father,’ she explained. ‘That’s why
I spoke like that. It didn’t sound a bit like you, Moley.
You generally run upstairs so much quicker than anybody
else.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘So I’ve been told before,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’re not tired, are you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes I am, rather.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, dear! And I’m afraid you had a dull evening.
I enjoyed the concert and Wilfrid was so nice, coming
home, not trying to show off, or anything silly. He’s
like that when you’re alone with him. And Ethel’s in a
very good temper and Howard will be here in a few days,
but I don’t like you to be tired. I do hope we’re not going
to be too much for you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I hope not,’ Hannah said, with a wry smile. ‘I shall be
all right in the morning,’ she added cheerfully, but she
stayed up for a long time, in the cold of her bedroom,
working at Ruth’s dress, repaying the child, whom she
was afraid to kiss, for her first sign of thoughtfulness.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXI</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>The arrival of Howard Corder unfortunately coincided
with the arrival of Mr. Blenkinsop’s letter, and what
should have been a glad little family gathering had Robert
Corder’s views of the younger generation for its entertainment.
Mr. Blenkinsop was the text of the discourse,
but everyone felt that illustrations from the home circle
might be supplied, and Wilfrid sat in lively, and Howard
in patient, expectation of reproach. Mr. Corder spared
them this, however, and, breaking off suddenly, he remarked
with a smile, that he did not want to spoil
Howard’s first evening at home.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wilfrid twisted an eyebrow in Miss Mole’s direction
and Howard looked steadily at his plate. He seemed to
have all the patience the other Corders lacked and a
capacity for being contented if he were given the chance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Howard must tell us all the news of Oxford,’ his father
said, generously resigning his position of spokesman.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh—it’s just the same as usual. We’ve had a lot of
fog,’ Howard said, and suddenly, at a slight movement
from the head of the table, Wilfrid and Ethel both began
to speak at once.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wilfrid waved a hand courteously. ‘Go on. Your
turn.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, it’s nothing. I was just going to say it’s funny you
should have had that letter from Mr. Blenkinsop——’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Funny!’ Robert Corder exclaimed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I mean—queer, because I’ve had one from Patsy
Withers. She doesn’t want to help me with the Club any
longer.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Indeed? Well, no doubt Miss Withers has very good
reasons for her decision and I can see no likeness between
her and Mr. Blenkinsop.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, no!’ Ethel agreed eagerly, ‘but she did promise to
help, and now she says Wednesday evening doesn’t suit
her. Oh! Perhaps she likes going to the week-night
service.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That would be very strange,’ her father said bitingly.
‘As a matter of fact, she was there last time. I told you
it was a mistake to have Wednesday for the Club.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But the girls wanted it then, and the Club’s for the
girls.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then you must be prepared to lose your helpers.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I should think you’d be glad,’ said Ruth. ‘I hate
Patsy Withers.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ruthie, Ruthie!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I do,’ Ruth said stubbornly. ‘She’s like barley sugar,
yellow and squirmy, and her voice is like it too, all sweet
and waggly, and she talks to me as if I’m about six.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If you were six I should send you to bed,’ said her
father. ‘I won’t have such remarks made at my table.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But you were making them yourself about Mr. Blenkinsop,’
Ruth said sullenly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That’s a very different matter,’ he said, and he went
out of the room. This was his usual way of emphasising
a disapproval which he forebore to express in words, and
possibly he believed it left his family depressed. Ethel,
indeed, looked frightened, and Ruth looked glum until
her next speech sent Wilfrid into a roar of laughter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t think it’s good for people to be ministers,’ she
said, and Ethel cried, ‘Oh, hush, Wilfrid, hush! Father
will hear you. And it’s very wrong of you, Ruth, to say
such things. It’s a noble profession. Isn’t it, Miss
Mole?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘All professions can be noble,’ Hannah replied gravely.
It was only a little while since Ethel had extolled the
doctor’s calling in the same words, only a little longer
since Ruth had flushed in loyalty to her father when
Miss Mole had disconcerted him, and in these changes
she measured the profundity of Ethel’s feelings and the
extent of Ruth’s trust. It was Howard, to whom Miss
Mole was a stranger, who looked uncomfortable, and
Ethel, glancing from one face to another, looking for
support and thinking of Mr. Pilgrim, assuring herself she
was right but wishing they would all agree with her, saw
her brother’s look and misinterpreted it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And when your own brother’s a minister, you’ll change
your mind,’ she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, shut up,’ said Howard. ‘Let’s go into the other
room and play at something.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Coming, Mona Lisa?’ Wilfrid asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah shook her head and remained by the fire,
under the hissing gas. As soon as Robert Corder heard
the young people in the drawing-room, he would look
into the dining-room to see if Miss Mole was doing her
duty; in his present mood he would be more disappointed
than pleased to see her there, and Miss Mole was willing
to disappoint him, but what a pity it was, she thought,
that he and she could not be companionable. Did it
never occur to him, that she might crave for maturer
society sometimes and need more relaxation than she
got? From seven o’clock in the morning until half-past
ten at night, she was busy in his service, dusting, cooking
carefully, making beds, shopping economically, darning
socks and stockings and his under garments, superintending
Doris, who was slow and stupid, and she got her
little periods of leisure by her own speed and contrivance.
If he had been a different kind of man, they could have had
good talks by the fire when she took in his tea at ten
o’clock. And, perhaps, he was thinking the very same thing,
and wishing she were a different kind of woman and
more like Miss Patsy Withers, and it seemed to Hannah
that Lilla would have been cleverer if she had chosen
her watchdog of the breed Mr. Corder admired. The
angularity and asperity of Miss Mole simply served to
show up the softness and sweetness of the other, but
Lilla’s thrifty turn of mind had seized on the opportunity
of doing two good deeds in one, supplying Mr. Corder
with a housekeeper and sparing herself the inconvenience
of having a penniless cousin on her hands. She would
have done better to have introduced Patsy herself into
the family and let her see what she could make of it.
Patsy would probably have found that a hero is more
easily worshipped at a distance and Robert Corder would
have learnt that flattery does not flavour food, and Hannah
saw that the result of this combined ignorance might be
as dangerous to her as Mr. Pilgrim, though not so disagreeable,
and might be disastrous to Ruth. And Patsy had
been at the week-night service and Mr. Corder had heard
something which disturbed him. Now what could that be?
Hannah asked herself, tapping her lips with her scissors.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Corder put his head round the door and Hannah
smiled at him as charmingly as she could. When he had
disappeared, Ethel came in and fidgeted with the ornaments
on the mantelpiece.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Finished the game?’ Hannah asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, but I have to stay out till they call me in. Miss
Mole, don’t you think it’s rather funny about Patsy?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Is it? You’re really glad to get rid of her, aren’t you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes. But still, I think it’s funny.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>This was as near as Ethel would go to what was on her
mind and Hannah would not give her the little push she
wanted. ‘Is she a great friend of yours?’ she asked,
instead.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, sometimes I think she is and sometimes I think
she isn’t. That’s what she’s like.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I know. You tell her something and then you wish
you hadn’t. Have you ever told her anything about me?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, Miss Mole, yes!’ Ethel cried, for she was truthful
and her deceptions were only for herself. ‘But only
about those mattresses.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, what else was there to tell?’ Hannah asked
grimly. ‘You did all you could, it seems to me. Never
mind, never mind! Don’t cry. You cry far too easily
and it’s not becoming and they’ll know you’ve been doing
it when you go into the other room. Stop it!’ Hannah
cried.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But you’ll think I’m a sneak and you’ve been so kind
to me lately.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ll always be kind to you if you’ll let me,’ Hannah
said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It wasn’t that I wanted to tell tales, but I did want to
talk to somebody.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then talk to me in future.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Did she tell Father?’ Ethel asked in a strangled whisper.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t know.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Because, if she did—Oh, there! they’re calling me.
I’ll come back next time I’m out.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Wilfrid changed places with Ethel. ‘There’s trouble
brewing,’ he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Man is born to trouble—And poke the fire for me,
please.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What I like about you, Mona Lisa——’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, yes, I should love to hear it, but what’s the
trouble?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What I like about you is your allusive and elusive
mind. There you are! The sparks are flying upward.
And, of course, there are lots of other things I like.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What’s the trouble?’ Hannah repeated self-denyingly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Revolt’s the trouble. Howard says he’s chucking the
ministry and all Mrs. Spenser-Smith’s good gold will be
chucked away too. What do you think of that? She sent
him to the University to make a high-class little minister of
him and he says he won’t be a little minister. He’s just
broken the news, and they’re arguing about it now instead
of getting on with the game. So we’re going to have a
happy Christmas, and I shall go as early as possible to my
poor dear mother and stay with her as long as she’ll
keep me. He’ll have a hell of a time, but it’s better than
having it for life.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah sighed. ‘Why do people want to give each
other hell?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Because it makes them feel like God. And it’s so easy.
Now the uncle——’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Be careful,’ Hannah said. ‘He’s in the hall, getting the
letters.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, he likes turning over the letters. God, again!
He has to know everything. And yet, Mona Lisa, to do
the man justice, he’s a benevolent deity in the chapel.
But that’s easy, too, when you come to think of it. His
people get the reward of their obedience, and so would
his children if they’d be what he considers good, which
means admiring and believing in papa. Ruth’s quite
right. It isn’t good for people to be ministers and there
are times when I’m sorry for the poor devil. If you see
yourself as the centre of the universe——’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I should have thought that’s what you do yourself.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, but I know I’m doing it. That makes all the
difference. Now the uncle——’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I ought not to be listening to all this,’ Hannah said,
but she liked having the boy there, sitting on the hearthrug
with his back against a chair and his arms hugging
his knees. She could pretend that thus her own son
would have dealt with her and she with him, while she
knew that the very lack of those demands which a mother
and son make of each other was what constituted the
charm of her relationship with Wilfrid.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, nonsense,’ he said, ‘you and I are the only reasonable
human beings in the house. Howard’s all right, but
he’s dull, and depressed, poor lad. Ethel’s trying to make
him change his mind and Ruth’s persuading him to keep
the bomb until her Uncle Jim arrives.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ruth seems to think her Uncle Jim’s omnipotent,’
Hannah said, with the suspicion of a sniff.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, he’ll take part of the shock. It was silly of
Howard to tell Ethel. She’s bound to blurt it out. She
can’t see a difficulty without bumping into it, or giving
such a jump that everybody else begins looking for it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>He stopped speaking as Robert Corder came into the
room, with a letter in his hand. ‘This is for you, Miss
Mole,’ he said, giving it to her slowly, and he looked at
her curiously and then at Wilfrid impatiently. ‘I thought
you were playing with the others.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘So I am, sir. I’m waiting till they call me in. It’s
one of those games where there’s more waiting than
playing.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Without examining it, Hannah had dropped the letter
on to her knee, with the address turned upwards. ‘And
they begin talking about something else,’ she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh yes,’ Wilfrid returned her smile, ‘they’re doing
that.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well,’ said Robert Corder, ‘I hope you are not disturbing
Miss Mole.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, we’re talking about something else, too,’ she said
pleasantly. ‘And I can sew at the same time. A woman
can always do two things at once. If she couldn’t, she’d
have a dreary time of it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I often envy women,’ Robert Corder said. ‘They have
useful and not exacting occupation for their hands, and
no labour need be dreary.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>To this, neither Wilfrid nor Miss Mole ventured a
reply, and Robert Corder retired after another look at the
letter on Hannah’s knee.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘He wants to know who your letter’s from, he wants
to know what we’re talking about, he wants to talk to
somebody himself. You ought to have encouraged him.
Mona Lisa.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ought I?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes.’ He nodded his head sagely. ‘Just for the good
of the community.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Why didn’t you do it, then?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘He hates the sight of me,’ Wilfrid said. ‘Too much
like my father. But you want to read your letter.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m not sure that I do. I don’t know who it’s from.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>When she had read it, she realized that Robert Corder
must have recognised the clerkly hand of Mr. Blenkinsop
who asked her to tea with him early the next
week. ‘I haven’t a hat fit to wear,’ was Hannah’s first
thought, and the second was one of impatience that Mr.
Blenkinsop could not manage his affairs without support,
but there was something flattering in his desire to see
her, and something touching, and, as she thought of him,
who looked so self-sufficient, she was bound to wonder
if Robert Corder, also, was not as much a baby as the rest
of them. Mr. Blenkinsop was a solemn infant who asked
for what he wanted and Robert Corder was a spoilt
one who expected his needs to be divined.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXII</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Robert Corder’s work took him out of the house for a
great part of the day, but it also brought him back at
times when a business man is in his office and knows
nothing of domestic affairs until he returns to find a meal
awaiting him and the work of the day apparently done.
Robert Corder was conscious perforce of the doings of
the household. He would swing down the garden path
in the morning and meet the butcher’s boy carrying a
recognisable joint, and if the joint did not appear in a
cooked condition that evening, he would wonder where
it was and why Miss Mole had ordered it a day before it
was needed, or he would come back and see half the
drawing-room furniture in the hall and get a glimpse of
Miss Mole doing something with a duster or a feather
broom. His study was never disturbed in this manner.
The fire was lighted before breakfast, and the room,
presumably, dusted and swept, and when he was in the
house he chose to sit there, but, even in that sanctuary, he
could not be unaware of sounds and movements. He
could hear the front door and the back door bells when
they were rung and the thumping feet of Doris as she ran
up the three stairs from the kitchen, and if she did not
introduce a visitor into the study, he would, as likely as
not, hear her voice, with its Radstowe burr, calling Miss
Mole to settle some question with which she could not
deal herself. He could distinguish Ethel’s prancing step
from Miss Mole’s quick, even one, and sometimes, when
he heard the front door shut, he would stroll to his window
to see whether it was his housekeeper or his daughter who
had gone out. When it was his daughter, he would have
a slight feeling of discomfort: when it was Miss Mole he
felt an active irritation. There was something wrong with
Ethel’s appearance and he could not give it a name, but
he knew she did not look definitely feminine, like Miss
Patsy Withers, in spite of her bright colours, or completely
unconscious of herself, as her mother had been, and she
certainly was not pretty. That, perhaps, was a good thing.
It would have been a great and highly distasteful anxiety
to have had a daughter who attracted young men, and
Ethel had given her heart to her work and seemed to be
content. People spoke very well of her in the chapel and
told him he should be as proud of such a daughter as she
should be of such a father. This praise of her seemed to
him somewhat exaggerated, but there was no doubt she
was a good girl and her fits of passion seemed to be less
frequent, but it was difficult to be patient with her nervousness
and secretly he resented, while he benefited from,
her protective plainness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When he watched Miss Mole it was with definitely
antagonistic feelings. The alert bearing of her head, her
quick step, seemed to him unsuitable in a housekeeper,
and arrogant in a woman who had no pretensions to good
looks. If she had to be plain and thin, she should also
have been meek, and he supposed it was possible to be
domestically intelligent without looking as though she
had some secret source of satisfaction in herself. That
look had been growing on her lately and he could not but
connect it with the visit and the letter of Mr. Blenkinsop.
He had seen her as an unfortunate woman, undesired
by any man, and he had despised her accordingly, and
with the suspicion that Samuel Blenkinsop had found
something in her which he had missed himself, he immediately
set about searching for it and felt uneasy.
He remembered, too, his discovery of Wilfrid, sitting on
the floor and talking to her, not dutifully, but with enjoyment
sparkling in his dark eyes, and it was increasingly
evident that Ruth liked her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Robert Corder did not understand that he was always
jealous of those who gave to some one who was not himself
and of those who received: what he did realise was
that Miss Mole had some mysterious power to make
certain people like her and that she did not like him, and as
it was impossible for him to like a person first, he remained
in his state of irritated interest and curiosity. Mrs. Spenser-Smith
had been wise in her choice of a housekeeper:
his house was well kept, his food was well cooked, and Ruth
looked healthier, but Mrs. Spenser-Smith probably had
no experience of Miss Mole as an inmate of her house,
of this personality which gave every promise of being
properly negative and then developed signs of positive
character. Not once, since her arrival, had Miss Mole
asked Robert Corder’s advice. The kitchen range, the
gas, the hot water, might go wrong, and Miss Mole was
equal to them or found some one else to manage them;
she had no difficulty in keeping her accounts; she brought
him no tales of dilatory or dishonest tradesmen. This
peace from domestic care was what he wanted, what Mrs.
Spenser-Smith had told him he ought to have and what
Ethel had not been able to give him, but he would have
been better pleased if he could have believed that Miss
Mole was making determined efforts and overcoming
her natural disabilities for his sake, instead of taking
everything in her easy stride. He knew nothing of Miss
Mole’s real difficulties, of the constant caution necessary
to prevent Ethel’s jealousy when any two members of
the family paid more attention to each other than they
did to her, to give her encouragement without raising
false hopes, to damp down her threatened returns to
sentimentality about Wilfrid, to give her the position of
mistress of the house while she did nothing to sustain it.
Miss Mole had to intervene in the quarrels which sprang
up so quickly between the sisters, to avoid giving evidence
of the sympathy between Wilfrid and herself, to
steer conversations into safe waters and, above all, to
conceal the control she really exercised. It was exhausting
work but it did not exist for Robert Corder. The family
of the minister of Beresford Road Chapel should be, and
therefore was, a happy one, and his own griefs, his
consciousness of the different treatment he received in
the chapel from what he received at home, were not
allowed to mar the concord, but it seemed strange to
him that while Mrs. Spenser-Smith should be ready,
almost too ready at times, to help him and Miss Patsy
Withers brought her rather touchingly simple little
problems for him to solve, his own children should give
him little and ask for less. There were no signs of
Howard’s improvement in this or any other direction.
He showed no affection and no enthusiasm, and Robert
Corder was confirmed in his opinion that it was a mistake
to make things too easy for a young man: his father had
fought for his position and kept it; Howard accepted his
advantages and did not use them. Robert Corder could
speak of these dissatisfactions to no one, now that his
wife had gone, and while she lived he had hardly noticed
them, and there had been no Miss Mole to add to them.
To discuss Miss Mole with Mrs. Spenser-Smith would
be to criticize her judgment; to deplore the faults of his
children might be to admit failures of his own, and when
Miss Withers referred to them in terms of praise he could
not buy her sympathy at the cost of her envy of a life in
which work of eminent importance was combined with
the amenities of the happy home he had made, yet it
comforted him that she knew of the little rift in the lute
for which he could not possibly be blamed. She seemed
to have an intuitive distrust of Miss Mole which agreed
with his own, and it was increased, no doubt, by Ethel’s
story of the mattresses. It was wrong of Ethel not to have
told him. It was a small matter, but it was indicative,
and it was necessary for him to keep an eye on the stranger
in the house. If it had not been Wilfrid’s mattress, he
would have taken action, but he could not pamper the
boy, even in the cause of discipline.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Such thoughts as these underlay his life when he was
in the house; outside it, they were forgotten if no one
jogged his memory, and he strode about the streets,
visited the sick, attended his committee meetings, with
an energy and liveliness which gave him a reputation as
a man of action. His actions were generally those of his
committees, but his enjoyment of an authority which
never presented itself to his mind as being safely diluted,
his look of vitality, his handsome head, his conviction
that he was of importance in the religious and civic life
of Radstowe, had a suggestive value for others as well as
for himself. To those who were sad or sick, his entrance
was re-animating; knowing this, he was able to help them
as he sincerely desired to do, and it was inevitable that
he should suffer from a feeling of neglect and of misvaluation
when he returned to his home where his importance
and his usefulness were diminished by the dullness,
or the wilfulness of its inmates.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He had no great power for concentration and no desire
for peace in which to meditate or to read and, unless he
had callers to interview, he had little to do in the house
when his letters were written and his sermons prepared,
and he had time and willingness to listen to the sounds
of voices, feet, bells and doors, to conjecture or to criticise.
He would hear a murmuring from the kitchen as he passed
through the hall and, sometimes, a burst of laughter, and
making some excuse, such as the need for another pair of
boots, he would penetrate into the kitchen regions and
find Miss Mole and Doris mysteriously busy at the table
or the stove, when he had expected to find one or both of
them idle.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘The Christmas puddings are ready for stirring,’
Hannah said to him on one of these occasions. ‘Will you
have your stir now?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘My stir?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Everybody has to stir, for luck.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Doris turned aside with a giggle. She was embarrassed
by the presence of the minister in the kitchen and by
Miss Mole’s airy way with him, and Robert Corder,
interpreting this sound correctly and reacting to it
immediately, took the opportunity to prove his essential
homeliness. He stirred manfully, circling the wooden
spoon through the unwieldy mixture and an unmistakable
scent, very pleasant but forbidden, rose to his nostrils.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I hope there is no brandy in it,’ he said seriously.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Mole looked disappointed. ‘I know some people
prefer beer,’ she said, ‘but I think brandy’s better. I
ought to have asked you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>He dropped the spoon. ‘But Miss Mole, you must
know we never have intoxicants in this house, and I
happen to be the president of the Radstowe Temperance
Society.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Does it count,’ she asked meekly, ‘when it’s cooked
and in a pudding? I’m so sorry. What can we do about
it? I can’t possibly eat all these puddings by myself.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Waste would only be an aggravation of the mistake,’
he said sharply, ‘but, another time, Miss Mole .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>He went away, very much disturbed. Surely the woman
could not be as simple as she seemed, and if she was not,
what was she? And this was the sort of thing which
could be ignored in an ordinary household but was of
real importance in one like this. Doris would spread the
story; it might have a far-reaching effect on the girl’s
attitude towards the drink question, and probably the
brandy had been bought through that young man whose
relationship to Doris had affected Robert Corder’s own
attitude towards the girl, as towards some one not quite
unspotted from the world of the flesh, and it would be
impossible to offer Christmas pudding to any visitor to
the house.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He returned hurriedly to the kitchen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And the mincemeat?’ he enquired.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m afraid that is contaminated, too,’ Miss Mole replied.</p>

<p class='pindent'>No, she was not simple, and he remembered the
mattresses. He had an impulse to order the destruction
of the savoury mess, to let the family go puddingless at
Christmas, but he hesitated and the ardour of his indignation
left him, and he did nothing. What he needed in
his house was a little committee of people like himself
which would frame and pass resolutions and give orders
in which responsibility was shared. Alone, he felt that,
in some way he would be baffled and his position worsened,
but when the pudding appeared on Christmas Day he
would quietly refuse to eat it and he hoped Miss Mole
would feel ashamed. Then swiftly, with the glibness
acquired by answering awkward questions at his class for
young men, he arranged such tolerant, humorous comments
as might be needed, on domestic accidents and the
lenience which must be extended to others in affairs
of conscience, but he felt very bitter towards a woman who
put him to these shifts and, as the object of his suspicions
and dislike, she became oddly fascinating: he liked looking
at her and despising her for her lack of beauty, he enjoyed
listening to her and silently sneering at her remarks: he
was puzzled by the frankness which alternated with her
slyness and he did not see how he was to get rid of her
without less petty reasons to offer Mrs. Spenser-Smith,
a practical woman who would make nothing of the little
objections he could name and who would not understand
that a mere personality could trouble his peace of mind.
He saw himself permanently saddled with Miss Mole
and, two days after the pudding incident, he found more
causes for mistrustful speculation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He saw her go down the garden path in what might
be taken for her best apparel and, as she went up the road,
she waved a hand gaily towards the next door house.
It was growing dusk, but he saw her hand plainly in its
light glove and the light glove offended him. She was
not at the tea table and when he asked where she was
Ethel reported that she had gone out. He made a dubious
sound and Ethel, tactlessly loyal to Miss Mole, said
quickly: ‘She has to go out sometimes.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I am quite aware of that, Ethel. Do you know where
she has gone?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘She said she was going to see Mrs. Gibson first,’
Ethel said, and he allowed a sufficient pause to elapse
before he made some reference to Mr. Samson. Had
anyone seen him lately? Did he still live alone?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ethel said she had not seen, and was not interested in,
the horrid old man, but Ruth said, a little shyly: ‘He
isn’t horrid. It’s just his face and that’s not his fault.
Miss Mole says she thinks he’s rather nice, like everybody
else when you get to know them.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And how has Miss Mole discovered this?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, she just knows things like that,’ Ruth said contentedly,
pretending not to notice her father’s covert
sneer.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXIII</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah accepted life as she found it, she accepted
imperfection, but this did not prevent her from pondering
on human existence in her own fashion. Finding pleasure
and excitement in little things, because there were no
others, seeing those about her doing the same, though,
as she believed, with less intensity, she could still wonder
whether more was not expected of human beings, or
whether, in getting food and shelter and what happiness
came their way, they were doing all that was required of
them. Robert Corder could see himself as a man with a
definite mission against evil; Wilfrid, perhaps, was somewhat
shamefacedly hoping to alleviate the physical
sufferings of men, but the mass of people was like herself,
without her special advantages, living from one day of
small things to another, grateful when sorrow was avoided
and pathetically thankful for peace, and in a world which
knew the procession of sun and moon and stars, the
miracle of spring and the pageantry of autumn, the
occupations of these two-legged creatures, running about
the earth, seemed insufficient. They vexed themselves
about things of no apparent moment, such as mattresses;
they became excited over a mild entertainment, such as
having tea with Mr. Blenkinsop; they wasted time, which
ought surely to have been given to some higher purpose,
in trying new modes of hairdressing for the benefit of a
strange sailor who would not notice them. But what were
these higher purposes and who pursued them, outside
the special band of thinkers and creators? And to these
people did their efforts sometimes seem as unimportant
as hers to Hannah Mole? She envied artists with their
definite objects and work which seemed to them imperative,
but envy was one of the emotions she never allowed
herself for long, and it vanished when she realised that
she, too, should be an artist in her own sphere, that,
indeed, she was already doing almost her best to be one,
and that the results of her labours, if they were good, were
no more to be despised than was a painting of a Dutch
interior because it did not deal with gods and goddesses.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This decision to be a conscientious artist was an inspiriting
one, particularly as it exacted the expression of
her own, and not Robert Corder’s, conception of what the
housekeeper to a Nonconformist minister should be.
It was comforting to think there would be disloyalty in
pandering to his notions, for in her relations with Robert
Corder she sometimes felt guilty. She who boasted that
she could like anybody, had not tried to like him, yet
Wilfrid had told her that a little encouragement would be
for the good of the community. The artist, however, did
not consider the good of the community. The best work
was not done in that way, and Hannah felt perfectly free
to go on disliking Robert Corder and to get from that
exercise the peculiar kind of pleasure which, as she
suspected, he was beginning to get out of his dislike for
her. She was cleverer at disguising her feelings than he
was, cleverer in every way, she believed, and her pleasure
would increase in proportion to her concealment and his
revelations. She must be allowed this joy, she told herself:
moreover, nothing was more dangerous than going
contrary to nature for the sake of an imagined future
good, and, if future good must be considered, what could
be better for Robert Corder and his family than the
impact of an independent mind on his?</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Mole was feeling rather gay and conceited after
her tea with Mr. Blenkinsop. She had made that serious
young man laugh once and smile unwillingly several
times, and, in a secluded corner of the tea shop, where
the food and the tea were good, she had talked freely for
the first time for many years. In her situations, she had
listened more often than she had spoken, and though some
of them had been lost through the sharp readiness of her
tongue, that tongue had merely been restive with pent-up
energy and lack of exercise, like a horse, not ill-natured,
but riotous when it sees a stretch of grass. To have a
listener like Mr. Blenkinsop was to have the grass and no
punishment for bolting. There had been no need to
pick her words—and when she did not pick them they
were harmless enough—with a potential, if not an active,
fellow-sinner, and when she left him she was afraid she
had talked too much for his convenience, though not for
her own comfort. Voluntarily, he had not spoken of his
affairs, and when, giving him his chance, she tried to tease
him about the gilded gratings of the bank and the dangerous
reactions of his evening liberty, he had assured her
that he was not an impulsive person. She had expressed
amazement and this was one of the moments when he
smiled, but he was solemn when he went on to say that
due consideration was always given to his undertakings.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then you haven’t my excuse,’ she said, ‘or my fun.
It’s a wonderful world, Mr. Blenkinsop, when you may
find an adventure round any corner.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, but one doesn’t,’ he replied crushingly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Of course one can avoid them. It’s a startling thought
that if I’d been of the avoiding kind, I should never have
known you. I’m sorry this incident always crops up when
we meet, but I suppose it’s in both our minds. I’m
referring—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I know what you’re referring to.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And you regret the reference and the incident.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not entirely.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then you’ve changed.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, I’ve changed.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah!’ Hannah said significantly. ‘And I don’t regret it
at all, for here I am, having an outing with a single gent,
and but for that, I might still be in Mrs. Widdows’ stuffy
parlour. But that’s not very likely,’ she added honestly.
She wished she had called him a technically single gent
and seen what he made of that. Possibly she had talked
so much that he had decided on reserve. She had told
him about her childhood in the country, about her
situations and the kind of books she liked and what she
would do if she had a lot of money. She felt tired by
her own eloquence, but relieved, and she did not think
she had given him cause to doubt her discretion. It would
be a pity if she had. She liked Mr. Blenkinsop and she
wanted to know whether the stories she had made about
him would come true, and when she looked back at her
past and the men she had met, as her employers and their
relatives and friends—for her life had been singularly
barren of closer relationships with men and women—she
decided that Mr. Blenkinsop was the one to whom she
would tell a secret or go for help, and when, in a quick,
frightened thought, she remembered Mr. Pilgrim, it
did not need a great effort of her imagination to see the
solid, bulky form of Mr. Blenkinsop overshadowing the
narrow-shouldered, somewhat slinking figure of the other,
like a policeman keeping an eye on a suspicious character.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Pilgrim, however, had come no nearer; Mr.
Blenkinsop had given her nothing new to consider except
a feeling of safety, and her mind was free to receive the
impression of Uncle Jim. As Hannah always had her
tongue in her cheek when she created romantic stories
about herself, she could make them as extravagant as she
chose, and she was hardly disappointed when she saw a
man, in clothes which looked too tight for him, who had
no likeness to her buccaneer. It was just as well, she
thought, when she remembered the difference between
the Miss Mole she had fitted to him and the one with
which this plain Uncle Jim, who might have been a tax
collector, was shaking hands. He had a close-clipped
fair moustache in a short face, a pucker of wrinkles round
his eyes which gave him an amused rather than a worried
expression, and though he was bronzed enough to make
Robert Corder look hectic with the colour on his cheekbones,
he was not immediately suggestive of hurricanes
and tropic sun. He was an ordinary looking man yet, in
the slowness of his movements and speech and in his
calm, apparently uncritical regard, there was something
to make Hannah feel that here was another person who
could be relied on. He had a dwarfing effect on Robert
Corder, but this was Hannah’s first opportunity of
comparing the minister with a man who belonged to a
wider world than that of Beresford Road Chapel, and it
seemed to her that Uncle Jim in the pulpit would be less
incongruous than Robert Corder on the bridge of a ship.
Uncle Jim’s authority was that of the man who knew his
trade and had his position as a consequence and a matter
of course, while, with Robert Corder, the position came
first, and the authority derived from it was a constant
source of gratification and made a constant demand
for recognition. Hannah thought sadly that she was
rather like him herself; she had no position to give her
a fair start, but she was not content to let her personality
make what mark it could, without assistance; a sign, she
feared, of a weak character.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She made another of her good resolutions and remained
silent and observant. She saw Ruth looking with shining
eyes at the imperturbable face of her uncle and glancing
from him to Hannah, as though she wished to connect
them in her happiness and to know what each thought of
the other. Ethel, wearing an extra necklace in honour of
the occasion, and a bright blue frock, rattled her beads
and jerked in her seat at the supper table, but her glances
had not the confidence of Ruth’s. She could never forget
the presence of her father, and her anxiety was that conversation
should go amicably between him and Uncle
Jim. Robert Corder did his best as host. He invited his
brother-in-law to talk of his experiences and Uncle Jim
was as unresponsive as Howard had been on the night
of his return. He said something about the weather and
Robert Corder lifted his eyebrows patiently. He was not
really eager to hear another person talk, but it was exasperating
to see such a waste of opportunity. A single
voyage would have supplied the minister with anecdotes
for countless supper tables and sewing-meetings, with
texts and illustrations for innumerable sermons, and
this man, who had followed the sea since he was a boy
and knew all the ports of the world, could produce nothing
more illuminating than a casual reference to the weather.
Opportunities did not come to those who could use them.
Howard and Jim were alike in their dumb obtuseness,
and what sort of minister Howard would make, his father
feared to prophesy. He sank back in his chair and resigned
his duties. He had done all he could.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Then Uncle Jim volunteered a remark.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What’s the matter with the gas?’ he said, looking at the
pendant light. ‘It oughtn’t to make a noise like that.
I’ll have a look at it to-morrow.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ve been looking at it for more than two months and
it doesn’t take the slightest notice,’ Hannah said mournfully.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth laughed and looked at her uncle. She had been
hoping Miss Mole would say something to show she was
not just an ordinary housekeeper who was afraid to speak.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Robert Corder frowned. ‘Then, Miss Mole,’ he said
sharply, ‘you should have called in the plumber.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But would he come, if I did call to him? And would
he go, if once he came? Plumbers,’ she said, ‘are like
everything else. You want them badly and, when you get
them, you’re sorry.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I think,’ Robert Corder said in the bland manner of
his annoyance, ‘you must make a point of wanting the
things you should not have.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That was implied,’ Hannah said brightly. She had
broken her good resolution and Uncle Jim had waked to
the fact of her existence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘We’ll try combined tactics to-morrow,’ he said, and
then he created a timely diversion. ‘I’ve got some Chinese
silks upstairs. I’ll bring them down after supper.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah stayed in the dining-room and Robert Corder
lingered by the fire.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You and I, Miss Mole,’ he said, ‘are not interested in
the Chinese silks.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Aren’t we?’ Hannah replied. ‘I expect they’re beautiful.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, no doubt, no doubt, but hardly matters of concern
to you and me.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Was he trying to remind her of her age and position
and hinting that she should not follow the others to the
drawing-room?</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not of concern, certainly. That’s why I’m staying
here,’ she said reassuringly. ‘I wonder if Mr. Erley can
stop these jets from hissing as well as the other one from
bubbling. I thought I was getting used to the noise, but,
as Christmas draws nearer, it sounds like all the geese and
turkeys making a fuss at the thought of being killed.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What a very unpleasant idea!’ he said, frowning
quickly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, isn’t it?’ Then she looked up at him and laughed.
‘I’ve spoilt your Christmas pudding and now I’ve spoilt
your goose.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Corder suddenly condescended to jest. ‘Or, as
you might say, you have cooked it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah laughed still more merrily. She was not going
to be beaten by the ladies at the sewing-meeting and
Robert Corder might have found it necessary to withdraw
in good-humoured dignity, before Miss Mole took
advantage of his affability, if Ruth had not appeared, to
say that Uncle Jim had given her a lovely silk with little
flowers all over it, and did Miss Mole think it could
possibly be made into a frock in time for the Spenser-Smith’s
party?</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘We’ll try,’ Hannah said slowly. She was thinking of
the little velveteen dress which was to have been a surprise
and which would seem so humble in comparison with the
flowery silk.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I knew you’d say that!’ In her excitement, Ruth turned
to her father and exclaimed, ‘she never says she can’t
do anything when she knows you want it! And do come
and stop Ethel from choosing a bright pink. There are
heaps of others and the drawing-room’s like a shop.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Just a minute, Miss Mole. I suppose you have replied
to Mrs. Spenser-Smith’s invitation?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No,’ Hannah said, ‘your daughter has done that.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I think it would be courteous to send a separate
little note. It’s very kind of her to ask you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, but I wasn’t sure that I ought to go,’ Hannah said
meekly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But certainly, certainly! You could hardly refuse and
you will find it quite a homely, friendly affair. Just write
to Mrs. Spenser-Smith and express your appreciation.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘In the first, or the third, person?’ Hannah enquired.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘The first, Miss Mole, would be more suitable. Write
it in the form of a note.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Very well,’ Hannah said, and she began to plan her
humble little letter, but Ruth had her by the arm to lead
her into the drawing-room, and was asking if she had a
party frock.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Black silk and jet trimmings. It’s the only wear for a
housekeeper.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And Uncle Jim’s got all those lovely things!’ Ruth
sighed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If you dare to say anything to him about me, I’ll never
speak to you again!’ Hannah whispered vehemently, but
Uncle Jim did not need a hint. He was looking at the
mass of stuff he had bought and wondering how he was
to get rid of it and Hannah’s modest protests were useless
when he thrust a roll of silk into her arms.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth’s happiness was now complete. ‘And won’t Mrs.
Spenser-Smith be secretly vexed when she sees us all
looking so grand!’ she cried.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXIV</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah had the homeless and the childless person’s
dislike for Christmas. There were a few people from
whom, in the course of her career, she had not been
completely severed, and to these she wrote, but the
paucity of her acquaintances and her lack of real intimacy
with them were very present to her at this time of the
year and almost persuaded her of some failure in herself,
but it was not easy, and Robert Corder had lately emphasised
the fact, to make friends outside the house in
which she was a dependent, and to most of the people
she had served, often wholeheartedly, sometimes with
misguided zeal, becoming absorbed in their affairs as
though they were her own, she remained as mere Miss
Mole, whose importance vanished with her useful presence.
She was accustomed to this state of things but it
still amazed her. A human being, to her, was a continuous
wonder, a group of human beings made a drama
of which she was half creator, half spectator, and she was
baffled to know how people amused themselves without
this entertainment which never palled and never ended.
Hannah was not one of those who considered it a waste
of time to lose a train and have to wait on a station platform,
who shut their eyes, or read a paper, in railway
carriages: she was thrilled by the sight of strangers and
by the emanation of their personalities, and it was hard
to understand that they did not get the same excitement
from her neighbourhood.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When she considered the Corder family dispassionately,
she could see that the material for her drama was not
promising. The egoism of the Reverend Robert offered
the most scope, for the egoism of a person whose abilities
are mediocre must have a humorous element, but in
Ethel, in Ruth, in the quiet Howard, in Captain Jim
Erley, in his shirt-sleeves, as he busied himself about the
gas, how could she find so much interest? Was her own
egoism enlarging the significance of these who made her
little world or was she really seeing the whole world in
miniature, which was all the ordinary human eye could
manage? The shaking of an empire was not more agitating
than the imminence of Howard’s disclosure about the
ministry; the intrigues of diplomacy were not more
complicated and needed no more skill than Mr. Pilgrim’s
intrusion into this life shared with the Corders, and the
news of a great victory could hardly gratify its engineers
more deeply than Uncle Jim gratified Miss Mole when he
stepped off the dining-room table and said, ‘You’ve done
Ruth a lot of good. If I’d known you were here I might
have stuck to the sea a bit longer.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Think of that!’ Hannah said, concealing her pleasure
under this light retort. ‘But you might have been drowned
on your next voyage and Ruth wouldn’t have liked that.
The reason she looks so happy is because you’re here.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, she’s different. Not so jumpy. I’m grateful to you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, I’m not a permanency,’ Hannah said rather
tartly, ‘and she must learn to rely on herself.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’re not going to leave them, are you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t know.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I shouldn’t blame you,’ Uncle Jim muttered indiscreetly.
He put on his coat and Hannah felt that he would
have said more if he had remained without it. She had
lost her buccaneer, but the brother of Mrs. Corder, the
brother-in-law of the Reverend Robert was still there and
her desire to know what the feelings of these three had
been in connection with each other, was almost a pain.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She took a step at a venture. ‘Is that a good photograph
of Mrs. Corder, in the study?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It depends who’s looking at it. My brother-in-law
would say no, I should say no, and so would Ruth, but
we’d all mean something different. She was something
different with all of us, I suppose.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And what would Mr. Samson say?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Who’s he? I’ve never heard of him.’ He made a
grimace. ‘One of the deacons?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah laughed and did not answer. She had learnt
another thing she wished to know, but she had not
finished yet. ‘You can’t have had time to see much of
your nephew.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, we stayed up rather late last night,’ he said, and
he and Hannah eyed each other calculatingly; he measured
her trustworthiness and she his willingness to trust.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m not supposed to know about him,’ she said at last.
‘I’m surprised Ethel hasn’t told me, but she’s rather preoccupied,
perhaps.’ She gave him a sidelong look out of
eyes in which green was the predominating colour, but
these words struck no response from Uncle Jim; he had
not received Ethel’s confidences as well as Howard’s, and
Hannah left this side issue. ‘Family disturbances are
very bad for Ruth,’ she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’d like to adopt her,’ Uncle Jim said suddenly, and,
just as suddenly, Hannah felt a rush of enmity towards
him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But that,’ she said coldly, ‘could not be arranged in a
few days, within which time we’re going to have trouble.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And I don’t see how it’s to be avoided.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘The right words in the right quarter—’ Hannah said
thoughtfully. She did not believe that Robert Corder
had any great desire to see his son a minister with a more
valuable degree than his own and a social distinction he
had missed. He would, of course, be able to make Howard
feel his inferiority, but it would be less easy to suggest it,
allied with fatherly love, to other people, and nothing else
would satisfy him. A little flattery, a little comparative
disparagement of Howard, would do much to mollify
him, but who was going to offer it? There was no hope
of that from Uncle Jim and it would come somewhat
startlingly from Miss Mole. Even Robert Corder might
suspect some motive in her admiration, and Hannah sighed
audibly at the difficulty, the impossibility, of acting wisely
for the future.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘The right quarter,’ said Uncle Jim, ‘seems to be this
Mrs. Somebody who’s financing the boy. It’s very
awkward for him. He’s had two years of her patronage
and that’s what’s going to worry his father most. Throwing
her money in her face! And I gather she’s a lady of
some importance.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>A slow smile curved Hannah’s lips. She had a sense of
power which affected her physically, with a tickling
feeling of pleasure. She was in haste to use that power,
her mission to the Corder family enlarged its sphere, she
saw herself as an appointed agent, and, for the moment,
she had finished with Uncle Jim.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’ll see Mrs. Spenser-Smith at the party,’ she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Must I go to the party?’ he asked in dismay. ‘I haven’t
got any evening clothes.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘They won’t be missed,’ Hannah assured him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She dusted the table on which she meant to cut out
Ruth’s silk dress, and, looking busy, she spread out the
material and fetched her pins and scissors, and Uncle
Jim watched these preparations critically, for a few
minutes, before he rolled away. Then Hannah ran
upstairs to her room, enjoying her unnecessary stealth.
She sat down by the wide-opened window with a pad of
note paper on her knee, and the energy she had meant to
concentrate on a letter to Lilla was dissipated through
the eyes which could see the coloured roofs of Radstowe,
the plumes of smoke, the spires, the factory chimneys,
the distant fields sweeping up to the high ground which
blocked the view of her own country. For her, much as
she disliked the day itself, the approach of Christmas was
the approach of spring in the West country. There might
be snow and frosts later, but always, at this season, there
was a damp mildness in the air, a message telling her that
the earth was being stirred by tiny pushing feet, pressing
downwards so that spikes, eager to be green, might reach
upwards, and she fancied she could smell primroses, that
scent delicate as the flower’s colour, soft as its pale cup.
She knew a place where she thought primroses might be
blooming even now, standing up among their strong
crinkled leaves like some marvellously fine work on the
rough palm of its maker, but from that thought and the
view of Radstowe she turned aside. The primroses grew
too near her cottage and innumerable reminders of other
lives lessened the urgency of the task she had set herself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This was to write her little letter of thanks to Mrs.
Spenser-Smith, as Robert Corder had directed, in the
first person, and to do it with a gratitude which would
make Lilla flush in annoyance and conceal the letter from
Ernest, and she meant to add a threat that if Lilla chose
to make trouble about Howard, her loving cousin would
know how to make it for her, but this proved more
difficult than she had thought and she tore up her attempt.
Lilla might appear in Beresford Road, confident of her
ability to right anything and demanding to know what it
was. It would be better to go and see her, to suggest a
probable cause of offence, to drop several hints from which
Lilla could pick up the one she thought least objectionable,
to leave her in no doubt that Hannah had a counterstroke
for any indignant thrust at the family whose welfare
she had so much at heart, and to set Lilla wondering at this
loyalty. Lilla would curb any amount of indignation rather
than have her relationship to poor Miss Mole made known.
She would have been wiser to have announced it, regretfully,
as a distant connection, from the first; now she
must face the accusation of snobbishness and suffer
from the truth of it, the accusation of deceit and explain
it away without convincing anyone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah had no time to spare, but she made enough of
it for the expedition across the downs and an interview
with Lilla which sent her chuckling home again, burdened
though she was with Christmas presents for the Corders.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘As you are here, you may as well take them and save
the postage,’ Lilla said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And how am I to explain where I got them?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That’s your affair, Hannah. I’ve never known you at
a loss for a lie,’ Lilla said severely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah pecked her cheek and wished her a happy
Christmas. ‘And you’ll see us all at your party. I didn’t
mean to come and embarrass you, dear, but Mr. Corder
insisted that I should. He implied that he wouldn’t
enjoy it without me.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You won’t get me to believe that,’ Lilla said, but she
was puzzled. A woman who attended to a man’s comfort
could be a potent influence and men were very simple.
Perhaps she had reckoned too surely on the safety of
Hannah’s plain exterior. She was capable and Lilla could
not deny her a peculiar kind of charm. Her arrival
involved worry, but her departure took something exhilarating
from the house and if she, who had disturbing
doubts about the niceness of Hannah’s conscience, could
feel like this, how much more likely was Robert Corder
to become dependent on her gay resourcefulness. And
Lilla remembered that there were years of Hannah’s
life of which she did not know the history, and it suddenly
occurred to her that Hannah’s anxiety for the
happiness of the Corders could more naturally be interpreted
as anxiety for herself, and this thought made
Hannah’s playful threats more dangerous, for, bad as it
was to have a cousin who was a housekeeper, it was worse
to have one with a past.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Willingly carrying the parcels, to save Lilla a few
pence, Hannah hurried back. There was bound to be a
storm when Howard broke his news, but she believed
she had reduced its violence and curtailed it. She had
done a lot for Ruth, according to Uncle Jim, she had
done something for Howard, and, if she could secure a
reasonable existence for Ethel, her life, she told herself
dramatically, would not have been lived in vain, but the last
was the hardest of her undertakings and when she cast
about for that middle-aged minister who might solve
Ethel’s problem, she could see no one but Mr. Pilgrim,
bearing olive and myrtle for Ethel and a sword for Hannah
Mole.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She threw a longing glance at Mr. Samson’s windows
as she passed. There was the old gentleman who might
have been her salvation, but he had already told her that
he lived on an annuity and had no dependents to consider
except the cats and birds, and for their future he had made
arrangements. ‘Then what is the good of my coming to
see you?’ Hannah had asked, and sent him off into one of
his throaty chuckles.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Undeterred by the thought of the annuity, she went to
see him that evening when the family was gathered in the
drawing-room. She had made him a new night cover for
the canary’s cage as a Christmas offering, and she hoped
to give it to him and return before her absence was
discovered, but Mr. Samson detained her. He had found
among the jumble of objects he had collected in his
travels, a fine piece of lace for Miss Fitt, and when she
had thanked him and heard how he acquired it and how
much less than its value he had paid for it, when he had
draped it round her shoulders and said that that, at least,
was not a misfit, it was nearly ten o’clock and time for
Mr. Corder’s tea, and Mr. Corder was hovering in the
hall when she opened the front door.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He looked at her bare head, at the parcel in her hand,
and for the first time, he was openly angry with her, too
angry to notice the tautening of her body and the lift of
her head. He considered it most improper for Miss Mole
to leave the house without warning; nobody had known
where she was; they were all extremely worried, and had
searched everywhere for her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not everywhere,’ Hannah said, smiling a little. The
trump card was up her sleeve and she was going to bring
it out. ‘If you had called next door you would have found
me with Mr. Samson.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Mr. Samson! I very much object, Miss Mole, to any
member of my household visiting that disreputable old
man.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Is he disreputable? I think he’s lonely, and he misses
Mrs. Corder. She used to go and see him regularly, you
know—at least once a week,’ Hannah said, and she went
upstairs to lay away, like a magpie, her lace with her roll
of Chinese silk, but she had not reached her room before
her triumph left her. She had been unreasonably reprimanded
and provoked, but was it worth while to hurt
the man? Moreover, she had been hoping for this occasion
and she was ashamed. She had rushed across the Downs
to do these people a service because it was one she would
enjoy, and, indulging herself again, she had done more
harm than she had prevented. She had imperilled the
peace and goodwill for which she had pretended to be so
anxious and planted a little barb, from which the wound
might fester, in the heart of a man about whom she had
chosen to know nothing but the worst.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXV</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Christmas Eve had dawned long before Hannah went to
sleep. She could not help thinking about Robert Corder
and though, having learnt certain forms of self-control,
she did not toss and turn on Wilfrid’s mattress, she was
unhappy and restless in her mind. She tried to keep back
the persistent thought by recalling as many past Christmas
Days as she could and vainly hoped sleep would overtake
her before she had done. There were the Christmas
Days of her childhood, like glorified Sundays, with the
church bells ringing a livelier chime and the sounds of the
cows and the horses in their stables and the feet of the
farm hands and her father as they moved about the yard
and did those jobs which no festival could interrupt, and
when she was very young, Hannah would mentally transport
one of their own cow sheds and some of their own
cows to a distant land where palm trees grew, and imagine
the infant Christ opening his eyes to see the soft brown
ones of Daisy, Cowslip and Primrose. The church bells
and the church decorations were all the gaiety Hannah got
out of those early Christmas Days. She opened her
stocking alone, in the darkness, received more than
usually hearty kisses from her parents when she went
downstairs, and solemnly walked with them to church,
and she had not been aware of missing anything. After
church and greetings among neighbours, which gave her
a secret feeling of grandeur, of participation in a rite,
there was the Christmas dinner of a turkey they had reared
from babyhood, a nap for her father and mother in the
afternoon and a quiet time for Hannah playing with her
toys and those imaginary friends who lived in one of the
kitchen cupboards, and came out and went back at her
will. When she was at school in Radstowe, she heard
about parties and pantomimes, and jogged home, at the
beginning of the holidays, to that quiet place where such
things were not, but by this time she had books and the
people in them for her companions, and the friends who
lived in the cupboard had been absorbed into herself, to
issue as manifestations of Hannah Mole with all their
beauty and ability, and such adventures, in embryo, as
must befall the brilliant and the fair.</p>

<p class='pindent'>And here she was, a housekeeper in Beresford Road, at
fifty pounds a year, remembering nearly twenty Christmas
Days far from the big farm kitchen, with the tall clock
ticking time away in the callousness common to all clocks,
the smell of burning wood, the noises of moving beasts,
of clinking pails and slow, heavy footsteps. Few later
events were as clear to her as the details incident to that
country life, and there came over her as she lay in bed,
conscious of the wide-spread city outside her window, a
hunger for quiet places and the conditions in which she
had been bred. It would have been better for her if she
had stayed in the farm when her parents died, struggling
against debt, forcing a living out of the fields which
responded with such faithfulness to care, with her own
livestock about her and in time, perhaps, she would
have married some young farmer who put capacity before
good looks, and by him she would have had lusty children,
clumping to the village school in their rough boots, as she
had done, their little ears and noses whipped red by the
wind. A good, hard life, that would have been, worthier
of an active human being than this trailing from house
to house, a dependent on the whims and tempers of other
people and a victim of her own; she would have been
spared her disillusionment about that love affair which
had seemed so romantic until she discovered that a man
might be a hero in battle and an essential weakling when
the inspiration was removed; and there would have been
no time for making drama of every look and word she
met and heard, when she was wrestling with the enduring
things, the fruits of the earth and her own body. But, at
nineteen, a girl who had faith in a different future and saw
every possibility of adventure and happiness in the world
beyond, would have been wise, indeed, if she had taken
up that heavy burden so that, at forty, looking back, she
might escape this vision of herself dragging her skirts
through other people’s dust. Now it was with an effort
that she remembered to believe in the goodness of things
as they were, for the cruelty she had inflicted on Robert
Corder was the first deliberately unkind thing
she had ever done, and it had shocked her into a humility
she sadly lacked and made her hope it would be a lesson
she would not forget. Was he asleep, down there,
in the room he had shared with the woman who
had never breathed a word to him about Mr. Samson?
It horrified Hannah to think of the grief that might be
gnawing him at the first realization that he had not had all
the confidence of his wife, the first suspicion that she had
withheld it because of something unreceptive in himself,
and if such suffering as this was beyond his power or did
not fit the measure of his devotion to his wife or the
devotion he had expected from her, he must be in a
supreme state of irritation at having revealed his ignorance
to Miss Mole. His words might be twisted into another
meaning or explained as inapplicable to his wife, but his
look of amazement, his dumbness, his perfect stillness,
must be as memorable to him as to Hannah. He would
not forgive her for possessing that information, she could
not forgive herself for passing it on, yet she could not
help maliciously wondering how he would try to punish
her. She had learnt, by this time, that his actions did
not match his anger, but he would probably find himself
compelled to say something in an attempt to blur the
memory of his sharp-cut silence and to put Miss Mole in
her place.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She hoped he would; if he could show the wound she
had given him, she would feel easier at having dealt it,
but, by accident or design, he disappointed her, in the
morning, and when she went into his study in the afternoon,
while he was out, to see that his fire was burning,
she thought Mrs. Corder looked at her reproachfully and
she realised that indulging her spite against the husband
had involved betraying the wife’s little secret, with all
the implications of Hannah’s own invention, dissatisfaction,
lack of confidence and a taste for a robuster companionship
than Robert Corder could offer. Hannah felt
almost physically sick. The consequences of her indiscretion
were possibly less than she liked to think the
consequences of any action of hers could be, but there
was a special brutality in telling tales of the dead: nothing
could have induced her to tell them of the living, yet she
had ignored a greater obligation in her desire to score a
point, to get a cheap triumph over a man she despised.
If she could do that, what could she not do?</p>

<p class='pindent'>She attacked the fire viciously, wishing it was her own
body she was belabouring, and then she sat back on her
heels with the poker still in her hand, and nodded at
Mrs. Corder, whose face was fading away as the twilight
deepened, assuring her that she would try to make amends
for this offence, pleading to be forgiven for what life had
made her, and again Hannah wished she had not left
the country. She would have been too much occupied to
be spiteful, and instead of kneeling in front of Robert
Corder’s fire she would have been busy at her own, and,
as it was Christmas Eve, there would be coloured candles
on the mantelshelf above the big kitchen fire, and coloured
candles on the table spread for tea, with thick slabs of
bread cut ready for the hungry children, with their reddened
noses and ears, when they came in from playing
about the farm, bringing with them a whiff of sharp air,
of earth, manure and stables as they opened the door.
The number of the children was indefinite. It was not a
detailed picture Hannah saw framed in the kitchen
where her own quiet childhood had been sheltered; it
was an impression of arms and legs and faces, of voices
which had not known the softening influences of a boarding
school in Radstowe, and of a vague man, the father
of these children, whose temper varied with the weather
and who had an unwillingness to take off his muddy boots
until he went to bed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At two fields’ distance from the farm, its blind end
facing a rough lane from which a path wound through
the orchard to the front door, was the cottage she had
refused to sell because of the craving for possessing earth
which came of generations of farmers and returned to
her strongly now. It was hers, yet she could not see nor
touch it. Her commonsense, partnered so strangely with
her carelessness and a readiness to lose her property
rather than emphasise her ownership, had forced her to
tell her tenant, as she called him ironically, of each change
of her address, for this was only fair to the cottage and the
land, and if he cared to think she was asking for the rent
he had light-heartedly promised to pay, she must suffer
that with the rest of her disillusions, but, as she sat on
her heels in the firelight, thinking with nostalgia of the
country she could often forget for weeks at a time, she
decided that she must be done with a sentiment already
ten years old and go and see if the roof had fallen in or
the apple trees been pruned. She had more hope for the
roof than for the trees. He would act if the rain dripped
on him as he lay in bed, but the welfare of a tree would
seem to him a fantastic matter to make a stir about, even
though, or perhaps because, it was her tree and not
his own.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The cottage had been let until the war came and
emptied it, leaving it vacant for her wounded hero and
herself, and what she had saved out of the rental she had
spent in furniture and repairs and in starting the little
poultry farm which was to supplement, with its profits,
the hero’s war pension. What had happened to those
hen-houses? Were there any descendants of the original
fowls? She pictured rotting wood and rusty wire and a
few mournful birds wandering about the orchard, and
she saw the refuge she had intended for her old age
occupied by the man whose commerce with her had
created the probable need for that refuge before her
working days were over. She had lost her actual and her
potential savings and, when she listened, she could hear
the feet of Mr. Pilgrim, an echo of the sound she had
heard so defiantly ten years ago, coming nearer with a
menacing deliberation, and, as the study door opened and
she looked round with a start, she was astonished to see
Robert Corder’s tall figure and gladder at his arrival than
she could have believed possible, though she was discovered
on the hearthrug, making free with his domain.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Is that you, Ethel?’ he asked, peering towards the
figure by the fire which must have illumined it adequately.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah smiled at the subtlety of this rebuke. ‘I’m
afraid it’s me,’ she said gently. ‘I came in to see that the
fire hadn’t gone out, and fires have such a reminiscent
effect.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘A pleasant one, I hope,’ he said, kindly making an
excuse for the unwarrantable lingering.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No,’ Hannah said. ‘Not at all. Perfectly horrid, in
fact. But there, what does it matter? I’ll light the gas.
And when we’re not allowed to have coal fires any more,
there’ll be a lot of changes. We shan’t be so much inclined
to think about our sins, and babies bathed by electric
radiators won’t be the same as babies bathed by open
fires, lovers won’t be so romantic and, in the face of
scientific improvements, we shan’t think about the past.’
She struck a match and shielded it while she looked at
him. ‘Do you think those will be changes for the better?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was obviously his duty to answer this question,
which might just as well have been put without so
much elaboration, but it was a duty Miss Mole should
not have imposed on him and he answered coldly, and
indirectly: ‘I think we must always be prepared to suffer
for our mistakes.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, I’m prepared.’ She lit the gas and turned to him
again, and her face had a disconcertingly elfin look.
‘Prepared,’ she repeated, ‘but not what I should call
really satisfactorily equipped,’ and she turned to go,
but Mr. Corder, as usual, called her back.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘There will be the chapel waits here, this evening, Miss
Mole. You have not forgotten that, I hope.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Coffee and cakes,’ Hannah said promptly. ‘I’m so
glad you reminded me.’ She would have been sorry to
miss the opportunity of watching his Christmas geniality
with the minstrels.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXVI</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>On Christmas morning, by candle-light, Doris brought
an early cup of tea to Miss Mole, with an ornamental
box of biscuits, from her young man and herself, on the
tray.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘My friend says it’s the least we could do,’ she replied,
when Hannah had made suitable exclamations. ‘He
thinks you’re such a nice lady.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Does he?’ Hannah sat up and the long plait of her
dark hair fell across the front of her nightgown. ‘And
I think he’s a nice young man and I’ll eat some of your
biscuits now, and when they’re finished I shall keep the
box on the dressing-table for all my little odds and ends.
Thank you for the tea, too, Doris. It was a kind thought
and you might make a precedent of it, if you know what
that means.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Doris did not know and was not concerned to learn.
She was used to what she called Miss Mole’s queer way
of talking and she was burdened, at the moment, with a
confession she had to make.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It was Mr. Wilfrid who told me to do it, before he
went away,’ she said. ‘And I told my friend and that’s
how we come to think of the biscuits. I was to make you
a nice cup of tea, Mr. Wilfrid said, and give you this
parcel on the quiet. I reckon it’s something he didn’t
want the rest of them to see. And he give me ten shillings
for myself,’ she added with a sigh. She was more than
satisfied with her young man, whose mother was so
respectably stiff, but Mr. Wilfrid was her ideal of manly
beauty and winsomeness. To keep Miss Mole’s little
parcel for him was an honour, but it was hard to go away
and leave her to the discovery of what was inside and,
among Doris’s other reckonings was the one that she
would never know what she had been carrying in her
pocket for the last three days.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was a small parcel and a small parcel suggested
something rare, and, turning it over and rattling it before
she opened it, Hannah pretended she would find a ruby
ring or a necklace of pearls, just as she had felt her stocking,
thirty odd years ago, and imagined marvellous toys
she knew would not be there, and when, at last, leaning
towards the candle, she drew a brooch from the little
box, tears started into her eyes and she could not see it
clearly. She could feel that it was smooth and oval, with
a narrow twisted rim, and she wiped her eyes on the sheet
and had a good look before she began to cry again.
Wilfrid, if he was awake at this moment, would think
she must be laughing, and she did laugh while she cried,
for that boy had tactfully chosen an old brooch which
had a humorous reference to his avowed admiration and
excused the nature of his gift. The brooch was held in a
narrow twist of gold and under a shield of glass was what
Hannah thought must be an engraving of the blind
Cupid drawing his bow, the offering, no doubt, of some
early Victorian lover to his lady.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Holding the brooch and crying with childish abandonment,
for pleasure in this pretty tribute, she wondered
how much time he had spent before he found exactly
the right thing, beautiful in itself, a whimsical comment
on his liking for her, and an ornament which might, so
conveniently, have belonged to her own grandmother.
She would wear it at the Spenser-Smiths’ party with
Mr. Samson’s lace; she could not wear the Chinese silk
which was still rolled in its delightfully foreign paper,
but her weeping ceased when she told herself that, with
three charming presents in as many days, there must be
something disagreeable waiting for her, to adjust the
balance of fortune. But for that she was prepared and
with Wilfrid’s brooch pinned in her nightgown while
she finished her tea and biscuits, she was better equipped
than she had been. Wilfrid’s affection was worth having
and this ridiculous fit of crying had done her good. It
was years since she had cried and it would be years
before she did it again, and she determined to spend the
rest of the day in cheerfulness if this family would permit
it, if Ethel would not be injured by some fancied slight
and if Howard would continue to hold his tongue.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The day began quietly. The present-giving in this
household did not take place until after the morning
service and the mid-day meal, and Robert Corder, who
certainly had some force in his personality, created an
atmosphere of peaceful thankfulness at the breakfast
table. The great day had dawned and he seemed to go on
tip-toe, as though he felt the presence of the sleeping,
sacred babe, and though he smiled readily, he did not do
it broadly, and his good wishes were given like blessings,
but, at one o’clock, when Hannah was basting the turkey,
one of Mrs. Spenser-Smith’s annual gifts, thankful, in
spite of her red cheeks, for a duty which freed her from
the chapel, she heard the loud tones of his voice like a
fanfare authorising joviality to begin.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At this signal, Hannah and Doris loaded the tray with
turkey, greens, potatoes, gravy and sauce, and Uncle Jim
appeared quietly from nowhere and picked up the burden.
The sight of his brother-in-law’s helpfulness was not
altogether pleasing to Robert Corder; it might have been
interpreted as a reproach, but he made a little joke about
the handy man and Uncle Jim muttered that the tray was
too heavy for a woman.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But it’s all knack, all knack,’ Robert Corder assured
him. ‘Trained nurses—and what wonderful women they
are—can lift a heavy man without an effort.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But you’re not a trained nurse, are you?’ asked Uncle
Jim.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah wanted to say that, no, unfortunately, she was
not a wonderful woman, but she remembered that it was
Christmas Day and simply shook her head. She tried to
look weak and modest, the subject of contention between
two strong men, and then, unable to resist asserting herself,
she ruined this unique experience by remarking that
she was used to handling turkeys, dead and alive.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Alive?’ Robert Corder said gently, giving her a chance
to retract before she must be proved guilty of untruthfulness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And alive. I was born and bred on a farm.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Were you? Then you’ll be able to give me some
advice. I’m thinking of starting a little farm myself.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Come, come, let us take our places,’ said Robert
Corder. ‘And I’ll ask you to carve, Miss Mole, as you
have such an intimate knowledge of turkeys,’ he said, and
Hannah, looking at him over the knife she sharpened,
thought he had a positive genius for getting a note of
disparagement into his voice. ‘But where’s Ethel? We
can’t start our Christmas dinner without Ethel.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘She’ll be here in a minute,’ Howard said quickly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But where is she?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t know.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then how can you say she’ll be here in a minute?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Because she’ll want her dinner.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Your remark was misleading. You made a statement
which was nothing but a conjecture. If that sort of
quibbling is what you learn at Oxford——’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, I’ve learnt a lot more than that,’ Howard began,
and two people held their breath for the few seconds that
passed before Uncle Jim said good-humouredly:</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, well, let’s load the tray up again and put the
turkey in the oven. The skies won’t fall because Ethel’s
a few minutes late.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I happen to be thinking of all the trouble Miss Mole
has taken.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Don’t mention it,’ Hannah said, and wished she could
look at Wilfrid. Mr. Corder’s moments of consideration
always arrived when he was annoyed with someone else.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I suppose she was at chapel?’ he went on.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh yes, she was at chapel!’ Ruth and Howard cried
together, in an eager unanimity.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not in our pew.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No,’ it was Ruth who started first and Howard did
not try to catch her up. ‘If Ethel sees one of her girls,
she always goes and sits with her. I suppose the girl
likes it,’ she added thoughtfully, and Robert Corder gave
a sharp glance at her innocently pensive face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Most inconsiderate,’ he said, ‘and Ethel must have
her dinner cold. Let us begin. Ask a blessing, Ruth.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth obeyed in an unwilling mumble. She disliked
addressing her God in the family circle as much as hearing
her father do it from the pulpit, but this was not the
moment to make more trouble and, as though even so
slight a communication with the unseen, and done by
proxy, had cleared away his irritability, Robert Corder
forebore to reproach Ethel when, flushed and breathless,
she slipped into her place, just as Hannah, with the
carving knife poised in her hand, chose the spot for its
insertion with great precision.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And how did you think they sang the carols, Ethel?’
her father asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Very well,’ Howard and Ruth said heartily in another
duet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I was asking Ethel.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ethel was physically and mentally incapable of telling
a lie: she could not prevaricate without blushing, yet now,
in an inspiration of self-protection and in reference, as
Hannah guessed, to some singing not heard by Robert
Corder, she made the one remark likely to turn aside his
questions. ‘Not very well,’ she said, with a roll of her
eyes.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I agree with you,’ he said curtly, and he looked at
Howard. ‘I can only suppose you were not listening.
But I would rather hear a disagreeable truth than a
pleasant fiction. It was very bad. Half the choir was
away.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Cooking their Christmas dinners, like Miss Mole has
been doing for us,’ said Uncle Jim. ‘You’ve roasted this
fellow to a turn. Any profit to be made out of turkeys,
do you think?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Difficult things to rear,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Pigs, perhaps?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Prices are so variable. You get a lot of pigs and find
everyone else has got them, too. We used our pigs for
our own bacon and that was about all.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then what would you start with?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Years of experience,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, don’t try to stop him, Moley—Miss Mole—’ Ruth
begged. ‘It would be lovely if he had a farm near Radstowe
and we could go and stay with him. He could try
with a tiny little place at first and then he wouldn’t lose
much money. What a pity he can’t have your little farm.
Couldn’t you let him have it?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s let, and when it’s empty I’m going there myself,’
Hannah said, and because she knew that Robert Corder
was suddenly attentive to a conversation he had been
pointedly ignoring, she added rather grandly. ‘People
who own land ought to live on it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>In a few moments of time, Robert Corder had to rearrange
all his ideas about Miss Mole. He had seen her as
a poor, homeless woman who must be glad of the shelter
of his house, and now he learnt that she had property of
her own: he had wondered at her independence of spirit
and this was now explained: he had resented her manner
of speech which was better than his own, her evidences
of having read at least as widely as he had, the charming
notes of her voice, which he acknowledged for the first
time; he had been seeking a way of getting rid of her and
found she could go when she chose, and he felt that he
had been duped. He cast back in his mind to those
occasions when he had tried to snub her and hoped she
had been as unconscious of them as she had seemed, and
he thought Mrs. Spenser-Smith had treated him unfairly
in not warning him of Miss Mole’s real position in the
world.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Is it the farm you were brought up in?’ he enquired.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, I sold that, but I kept a little place on the estate,’
she said, and she began cutting second helpings for those
who might want them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And where is this little property?’ he asked genially.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Over the river,’ said Hannah, with a jerk of her head.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘In Somerset?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, in Somerset.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And that’s where Mr. Pilgrim comes from,’ Ruth said,
looking at Ethel.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s a large county,’ said Hannah.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘A charming county,’ said Robert Corder, giving Miss
Mole the credit for it, and when the pudding came in,
he ate his share. He had forgotten about the brandy.
He had other things to think of.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah went into the kitchen as soon as she could.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Be off with you,’ she said to Doris. ‘I’m going to do
the washing up. You can stay out till half-past ten to-night,
but not a minute later, and be sure to thank your
young man for the biscuits.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>She stacked the plates neatly, collected scraps for Mr.
Samson’s cats, washed the silver first and dried it before
it could get smeary, and while she did this methodically
but almost mechanically, she was thinking what a fool
she was, a fool to come to Radstowe just because she
loved the place, a bigger fool to have spoken about her
cottage, and though she knew that her possession of it had
impressed her employer, she also knew that his curiosity
would not be content with the little she had told him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Fool, fool, fool,’ she said, pushing the plates into the
rack. She could not get into her cottage and, if she could,
she had not a penny for food and firing. She was angry,
too, at her ignorance of the conspiracy in which Howard
and Ruth had been joined at dinner. They were protecting
Ethel, but from what? And they had been so
eager in it that they had almost roused their father’s
suspicions. Well, she would find out. She could always
find out anything she wanted to know; her difficulty was
in keeping her own secrets, and she, who cared little
enough for money, but knew its freeing value for the spirit,
wished the china under her hands would change to gold.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She heard Ruth calling her and she did not answer.
‘If she wants me, she can come and fetch me,’ she muttered.
‘She can’t tear herself away from that blessed man
for a minute.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>But Ruth, divided in her affections, was not unfaithful.
‘Are you there, Miss Mole, dear?’ she asked, hurrying
into the kitchen.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, and Miss Mole dear’s very busy.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But we’re waiting for you—to open the presents.
Uncle Jim said why weren’t you there, and Howard’s got
something for you that you’ll like.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, no. It’s a family affair. I’ll come in afterwards.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I feel happier with you there, Moley, and safer.
Ethel’s such an idiot. She looks as if she’s going to cry.
I suppose she didn’t get a chance to speak to Mr. Pilgrim,
or else he wasn’t nice to her. Or it may only be her way
of being excited. That was a narrow escape at dinner,
wasn’t it? I don’t know what Father would say if he knew
she’s been at Mr. Pilgrim’s service, and on Christmas Day,
too!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah did not know either, but what seemed to her
of more importance was Mr. Pilgrim’s view of this attention
and Ruth’s painfully clear vision of Ethel’s weakness.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXVII</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Mrs. Spenser-Smith’s party was usually on the twenty-seventh
of December, a date on which no hopeful member
of the chapel would have made any other engagement
until the chance of an invitation had gone past. On
Boxing Day, there was an entertainment at the Mission,
demanding the attendance of the whole family and Doris,
and Hannah was left alone in the house. Later, she was
to look back at that solitary evening as at an oasis where
she had rested between two stages of a journey and, as
though she knew the one in front of her was the harder,
she made the most of the interlude, sitting by the fire
and reading one of the books which Mr. Blenkinsop had,
most unexpectedly, sent her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Uncle Jim and Howard had been for a long walk in the
country and she supposed Howard’s affairs had been
discussed and they had arranged their plan of action.
She could do nothing more in that business, but she had
determined to try a new method with Robert Corder, to
present herself to him as the person who understood, and
so to take the burden of his indignation from those who
were less able to bear it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I shan’t succeed,’ she said sadly, knowing how far
short her actions always fell of her intentions, and then,
remembering the wrong she had done Mrs. Corder and the
reproachful, half humorous gaze she met when she
went into the study, she rejected the idea of failure.
Robert Corder himself was doing what he could to help
her. He had been very affable since he learnt she was a
lady of property and she had not thought it necessary to
tell him how small and poor that property was, and
perhaps he shared her own desire to be kind and was
frustrated by the same cause, the insistent craving to be
impressive, and as there was not room for two such
people in the same house and one must make way for the
other, it was Hannah, who flattered herself on her superior
sight, who must stand aside while he went blindly on.
Nevertheless, he had his own kind of cleverness. He had
been silent about Mr. Samson until that very afternoon,
when he had casually mentioned that he had called on the
old gentleman, and implied that Mrs. Corder had always
hidden her light under a bushel and been chary of speaking
about her good deeds, which he was glad to continue
if he could, but that what the wife of a minister could
properly do was perhaps not quite suitable work for an
unmarried lady.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I never thought of it as work, and he likes me,’
Hannah had cried.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Is that a compliment?’ he asked gently.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘He liked Mrs. Corder, too.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If you think it over, Miss Mole, I am sure you will
see the difference,’ he replied, and it was all Hannah could
do to refrain from saying that Mr. Samson’s affection for
both of them was grounded on his partiality for what he
called misfits, and that Mrs. Corder’s good deeds, in his
connection, had been a charity towards herself. Hannah
was looking forward to Mr. Samson’s account of the
interview. She would have been interested to know that
Mr. Corder, who was a follower though he thought
himself a leader, had been influenced, against his will,
by the old man’s high praise of Miss Mole which fell into
line with Samuel Blenkinsop’s attentions and the books
which had not escaped Mr. Corder’s notice, with Wilfrid’s
and Ruth’s affection and Ethel’s dependence on her
judgment, and with the little property in Somerset. The
fact that he continued to consider Mr. Samson a disreputable
old person with a loose tongue and no respect
for the status of a minister, did not affect his changing
estimate of the woman he could not help distrusting.
She was undoubtedly a woman of some character and
he hoped she would not show too much of it at Mrs.
Spenser-Smith’s party. He was afraid she might be too
clever at the games or too lively in demeanour, for she
was his housekeeper, after all, and he did not want
Mrs. Spenser-Smith or Miss Patsy Withers to imagine
she was more, and he was sorry Mrs. Spenser-Smith’s
truly Christian hospitality should have urged her to
include Miss Mole in the invitation. This was the little
shadow on the prospect of an evening towards which he
looked forward as much as Ethel and more than Ruth
did. He knew his people, loving him when he was in the
pulpit, loved him still more when he was out of it, and
there was a rich pleasure in letting them see him play
at musical chairs with the eagerness of a boy, act in the
charades, and dance Sir Roger de Coverley, with a slightly
comic gaiety, before the party came to an end with the
singing of Auld Lang Syne.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth had her own troubles about the party. There
was the usual trouble about Ethel who giggled and looked
too pleasant and wore too many bits of jewellery and
would probably have one of her tempers when they got
home; there was the difficulty of pretending to herself
that her father was always a jolly man and of trying not
to feel half ashamed of him in his frock coat; there was
the disappointment that Uncle Jim would not be in
evening clothes, and, worse still, had cheerfully confessed
that he had possessed none for many years, and allied to
this worry, was Miss Mole’s black silk dress with the jet
trimmings. Ethel’s Chinese silk had been made up
hastily by an obliging little dressmaker who went to the
chapel, and Miss Mole had finished Ruth’s, and they were
the nicest dresses they had ever had; Howard would be
in his dinner jacket, but the appearance of the contingent
from Beresford Road would be completely spoilt by
Uncle Jim’s blue serge and Miss Mole’s black silk. Her
father’s frock coat did not matter so much. People were
used to it and he was a minister, but a favourite uncle in
blue serge, rather short in the sleeves, and Miss Mole,
who had promised Ruth they would have all sorts of
jokes about the party afterwards, so that the more they
hated it, the more fun they would get in the end, Miss
Mole looking housekeeperish and Uncle Jim, looking all
wrong, would make a mock of the beautiful new dresses;
they would look like the accidents they were. Nothing
was ever really right, Ruth thought miserably. This was
the party dress she had wanted all her life and she longed
to wear it, in spite of the background her elders would
make for it, but she had not been deceived by Miss Mole’s
description of the velveteen frock as one to wear on
occasions for which the other was too gay. She knew
Miss Mole had made it in secret for the Spenser-Smiths’
party and must have sat up late at night to get it done.
It was pretty, too, of a deep coral colour which was kind
to Ruth’s pale cheeks, and there was a hair ribbon to
match, for Miss Mole remembered everything, and the
present must have cost more than she could afford. She
felt she ought to wear it; she could explain to Uncle Jim
and, anyhow, he would not notice, and Ruth laid both
dresses on the bed and decided first for one and then for
the other. It was horrible, it was treacherous, to think,
as she could not help thinking, that if Miss Mole had
spent the time and money on herself, Ruth would have
been happier at this moment, and then, as she stood in
her petticoat, trying not to cry at the maddening perverseness
of this dilemma, Miss Mole looked in on her
way upstairs to dress and quietly took the velveteen frock
and hung it up.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But Moley—!’ Ruth exclaimed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No you don’t,’ Hannah said. ‘I haven’t been working
my fingers to the bone, as they say, for a dress that isn’t
going to appear to-night.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But you worked them to the bone for the other one.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You can wear that at the Thingumbobs’ party next
week. I ought not to have given it to you for Christmas, but
I hadn’t anything else. I might have known your Nonconformist
conscience would make you miserable about
it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I haven’t got a Nonconformist conscience!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then wear your uncle’s frock,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>That was settled, and Ruth sank on to her bed to enjoy
this moment of relief, to tell herself, once more, that Miss
Mole knew everything, to look back at those terrible two
years between her mother’s death and Miss Mole’s arrival
and find they were too black for contemplation. It was
mean, it was despicable, to mind about the black silk
and jet trimmings when they were worn by Miss Mole
who had thought about the night-lights, who had chased
away fears, without mentioning them by name, and been
wonderfully kind without encroaching on the rights of
the mother for whom Ruth still kept her caresses and the
spoken expression of thoughts which Miss Mole was
content to divine.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth cast away all her cares except the one about
Howard, who had the sudden indiscretions of the naturally
discreet and might choose this very night for telling Mrs.
Spenser-Smith he was not going to be a minister. It was
no good asking him not to do it; if she put the idea into
his head, it might pop out at any minute. That was the
way things happened with Howard. He was good-natured
and patient and easy-going and all of a sudden it would
seem that he had been nearly boiling for a long time, and,
at last, the lid had blown off. It would be awful when
this particular lid blew off, for there would be more
explosions than one, and Ruth gave a little shudder and a
last look into the glass, before she went downstairs.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Uncle Jim was in the drawing-room. He was freshly
shaven and he had put on a clean shirt, but he was reading
the evening paper as though a party were no more agitating
than staying at home, and Ruth envied, while she
pitied, the calmness of middle-age. He looked up, however,
and approved of her appearance, just as her father
bustled into the room, looking at his watch and complaining
that Howard was not in and would make them
all late.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, well,’ this was Uncle Jim’s usual soothing preface.
‘Perhaps the boy doesn’t want to go.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Doesn’t want to go!’ Robert Corder had banked Mrs.
Spenser-Smith’s Christmas cheque that morning and his
voice was shrill with indignation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, well,’ Uncle Jim tried again. ‘Perhaps he’s met
a friend, or something.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps he’s been run over!’ Ethel cried, coming in
with a rattle of beads, but no one encouraged this notion
and she had all her anxiety to herself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s a strange thing,’ Robert Corder said more calmly,
‘that with my passion for punctuality, I should be constantly
vexed,’ and he looked at Ethel, ‘in this manner.
And where’s Miss Mole? And what friends has Howard
that he should meet at this time of night and when he has
an engagement?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, for goodness’ sake, Bob, don’t make mountains
out of molehills. He’ll be here soon enough and if he
makes us half an hour late, let’s be thankful.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If you feel like that, James,’ said Robert Corder, who
could hardly believe he had been reprimanded in the
presence of his daughters, ‘you’d better stay at home.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘All right, I’ll look after the house for you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But Doris’s adenoidy aunt has come on purpose to
keep her company!’ Ruth protested, because the cowardly,
snobbish side of her half hoped Uncle Jim would stick
to his decision.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Her what?’ Robert Corder demanded.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Her aunt who has adenoids,’ Ruth answered sullenly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t like to hear you using such expressions,’ her
father said mildly, and Miss Mole, entering at that moment
with a slight rustle, knowing she looked nice and was
going to surprise them, said levelly, using the beautiful
middle notes of her voice,</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m afraid it’s my expression, but really, when you’ve
seen and heard her, you can’t call her anything else.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But that isn’t black silk, Moley!’ Ruth exclaimed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Mole’s dress was not fashionable and it was
modest, with long sleeves and a small opening at the
throat. It was made of a moire silk which changed from
green to brown as the light fell on it, a varying colour
which matched her eyes, and Wilfrid’s brooch fastened
Mr. Samson’s string-coloured lace.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No,’ she said. ‘This belonged once to my old lady
with the wigs. I believe she had it in her wedding trousseau
and it will last for ever. I’ve had it cleaned, and I’ve
had it remade—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Fine old piece of lace,’ Uncle Jim remarked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And what a quaint old brooch,’ Ethel said, with a
doubtful glance at her own beads.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ said Hannah lightly, ‘they’ve both been in the
family for generations.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Robert Corder went out of the room. There was no
lace or old jewellery in his family, and where was Howard?
He paced up and down the hall and, in the drawing-room,
Ethel fidgeted and Ruth looked gloomily at Hannah.
Her relief at Miss Mole’s appearance was spoilt by this
worry about Howard, and now Uncle Jim was saying he
would come to the party, after all, so that he could treat
them to cabs across the downs, to make up for lost time
and keep the girls’ hair tidy. Things were never altogether
right, she discovered again, but they improved a little as
Howard entered the house and, rushing past his father
without apology, cheerfully shouted an assurance that he
would not keep them waiting for five minutes.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXVIII</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Howard ought not to have spoken in that cheerful
manner or to have looked so unabashed when he came
downstairs, so unusually lively and determined that the
reproaches died on Robert Corder’s lips. Miss Mole
ought not to be wearing old lace and appearing calm at
the prospect of being Mrs. Spenser-Smith’s guest; in
fact, her double masquerade of housekeeper and lady
with a little property was disconcerting. It was irritating
to be forced into a cab with her, while his children and
his brother-in-law crowded into another. He objected to
the cabs on principle: he could not afford these luxuries
and, though he was not paying for them, he disliked the
ostentation of such an arrival. And what was it that had
cost Howard fifteen shillings? Nothing, he thought,
should have cost him as much as that: the boy had too
much money to spend: but what had he spent it on and
why had he told Jim about it?</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I thought it would be something like that,’ Jim had
growled.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Robert Corder hated hearing snatches of conversation
and remaining in ignorance of their context; he hated
this familiar nearness to Miss Mole and he sat stiffly,
looking out of one window of the cab, while Miss Mole
looked out of the other.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘We’ll soon be there,’ she said in a small voice, as though
she was comforting him, or was she really more nervous
than she seemed and in need of a little encouragement?
He saw her profile by the light of a passing car, and it
was meek and drooping, her head was bare and the collar
of her coat was turned up.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Too soon?’ he enquired kindly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh no. I’ve always wanted to see Mrs. Spenser-Smith’s
children.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>He squeezed himself further into his corner of the cab.
‘I’m afraid they are not going to be the equals of their
parents.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, they never are,’ Miss Mole said sadly, and he took
another look at her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You don’t happen to know where Howard was this
evening, I suppose?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No idea,’ she said in a sharper voice, and she thought
of the bowl of Roman hyacinths he had given her for
Christmas.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Robert Corder let down the window to see if the other
cab was following, the wheels crunched the Spenser-Smiths’
gravel, and Hannah stood in the porch, surrounded
by gigantic chrysanthemums.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was he who led the procession into the drawing-room,
with Ethel at his heels: Ruth tried to get behind Miss
Mole but she kept her place in front of Uncle Jim and
had the pleasure of watching Lilla’s greeting of the
minister and his daughters before she stepped forward
for her own welcome. This was an extended hand and
a half-puzzled glance quickly changing to one of recognition.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, it’s Miss Mole,’ Lilla said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘How sweet of you to remember me,’ Hannah replied.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Valiantly Lilla restrained a frown and her quick eye
saw the lace, the brooch and the moire silk before Hannah
felt her hand grasped in Ernest’s and knew that only his
duty to his other guests and the instructions he had
received from Lilla prevented him from taking her into
a corner and having a good cousinly chat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah found a corner for herself. She asked for
nothing better than a point of vantage from which she
could watch Lilla so skilfully varying the warmth of her
smile for each newcomer and, by the slight changes in
her cordiality, Hannah thought she could judge the
worldly position or soundness of doctrine of each arrival.
Lilla was perfectly dressed for her part; richly enough to
do honour to her guests and remind them of their privileges,
but with due consideration for the shabbily clad,
and of these there was a good number, and Uncle Jim’s
was not the only blue serge suit. Hannah recognised
many faces she had seen in the chapel, faces of matrons,
of spinsters and of young men with thin necks. It was
surprising to see so many young men with thin necks
and large Adam’s apples; it had something to do with
Nonconformity, she supposed: perhaps Mr. Corder would
be able to explain their association, but at the moment he
was engaged by a gloomy deacon who could not forget
the chapel in the party, and indeed, the party was the
chapel on its lighter side, and Robert Corder, trying to
get away from the deacon, was as anxious as anyone else
to emphasise that side and to encourage the liveliness
with which Mrs. Spenser-Smith’s parties always went
from the beginning. Already, Ruth was biting her pencil
as she earnestly took part in a competition, and Ethel
was being very bright with the young men whose
placarded backs she had to examine. Uncle Jim, to whom
self-consciousness was unknown, was prowling round the
room and volunteering advice about the competitions to
people he had never seen before, and enjoying himself
more than he had expected. It was easy to distinguish
Margery Spenser-Smith, like a more sophisticated Lilla
at that age, and to recognise sons of the house in a youth
who had something of Ernest’s quiet kindness in his
manner, and a younger boy who looked more bored than
any guest would have dared to be. These were Hannah’s
cousins and, if she knew her Lilla, they had not heard of
her existence. As far as they, and most of the other people
in the room, were concerned, Hannah was invisible,
though Miss Patsy Withers had given her a sweet smile,
and she was tiring a little of this advantage when she saw
Mr. Blenkinsop approaching. There was an empty chair
beside her and she pointed to it, hoping Lilla or Robert
Corder would see this airy gesture, while she smiled up
at him, a radiant Miss Mole, her face transfigured by the
laughter behind it. Yet there was nothing comic in Mr.
Blenkinsop’s appearance. He looked very clean and his
dinner jacket was well cut; the little black tie and the
winged collar became him; he seemed slimmer in the
waist and broader in the shoulders; his neck was not thin
and he had no convulsively working Adam’s apple.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I didn’t expect to see you here,’ she said. ‘You’re a black
sheep, but perhaps Mrs. Spenser-Smith doesn’t know it.
Thank you for the books, Mr. Blenkinsop. I’ve used up
a lot of Mr. Corder’s candles, reading them when I should
have been asleep.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You mustn’t do that,’ he said, with a little frown.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Dishonest?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No. Tiring. As for dishonesty, I was going to telephone
to Mrs. Spenser-Smith and say I’d got a cold—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m glad some one else can tell lies,’ Hannah interjected.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And then, Mrs. Gibson told me you’d be here, so I
came too.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, tell me all about it, quick! You’ll be dragged
away to play one of those idiotic games in a minute.
What’s been happening?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I spent Christmas Day with a sister of my mother’s.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And when you got home—?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And when I got home, I felt worn out,’ Mr. Blenkinsop
said simply. ‘Sitting in a stuffy room, after a heavy
meal, and trying to keep up a pleasant conversation.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Don’t I know it!’ Hannah said feelingly. ‘I’ve spent
years of my life doing that—years! At about fourpence
halfpenny an hour. It’s grim, isn’t it? I’d rather have a
suicidal husband. There’s some excitement about that
and the hope of ultimate release.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not if people insist on being as resourceful as you
were,’ Mr. Blenkinsop said incisively.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No,’ Hannah said penitently. ‘And yet you sent me
those books! But go on, Mr. Blenkinsop. When you got
home, worn out, in no state to deal with a difficult situation—what
happened?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I went to bed, of course.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh dear,’ Hannah groaned. ‘If I laugh out loud, Mrs.
Spenser-Smith will hear me and take you from me, and
I can’t spare you, but I’m longing to laugh! It hurts!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>He turned his mild, spectacled gaze on her. ‘What’s
the joke?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, nothing, nothing! I was prepared to hear the story
of another rescue, and you merely went to bed!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t see anything funny in that.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps there isn’t,’ Hannah said amiably, and her
lips twitched as she imagined his methodical retirement
for the night; she saw him winding his watch, laying his
clothes aside neatly, getting out a clean collar for the next
day and examining the buttons about which he was so
nervous, and Mr. Blenkinsop’s voice, more intense,
reached her just as he was getting into bed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But there’ll have to be a rescue, of another kind,
sooner or later,’ he said, and Hannah told herself that he
had come to the party to talk to her about Mrs. Ridding.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m afraid to offer to help,’ she said, ‘in case I do the
wrong thing again, but if I can, I will.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘The ridiculous part of it,’ he confided, ‘is that I believe
he’d be just as happy without her.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, that’s a comfort, isn’t it?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t know. I think it makes it worse.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’re the best judge of that, Mr. Blenkinsop, but I
should call it an extenuating circumstance.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘These people simply suck the strength out of their
relations—like vampires,’ Mr. Blenkinsop said, becoming
fanciful under emotion. ‘I believe he’d be better if he
had a thorough change.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Of wives?’ Hannah asked flippantly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I shouldn’t care to offer anybody the position,’ he said
bitterly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I may be wanting a job myself, before long,’ Hannah
said. ‘I suppose you don’t know any respectable old
gentleman—but not too respectable—with a competency—and
not an annuity—who would suit me?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Don’t be silly,’ said Mr. Blenkinsop and, when he
looked at her, he missed the mocking curve of her lips.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m proud to say I’ve never asked anyone for help
yet,’ she said, ‘but the day may come. Yes, the day may
come,’ she repeated, and now he saw that she was smiling
again, but not mockingly and not at him. ‘Mrs. Spenser-Smith
has got her eye on you,’ she said, ‘but stay here
for a little longer if you can. It doesn’t do to boast. You
see, I’m asking you for help already.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Just sitting here?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Just sitting here,’ she said, and Mr. Blenkinsop settled
himself in his chair with an adhesive pressure.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was observant, as far as he went, which was no
further than the person who held his interest at the
moment. He had not the power to watch another group
of people at the same time, to see the development of a
situation or to feel slight differences in the atmosphere,
which was Hannah’s by nature and by training, and he
had no clue to her strained look which quickly changed
to one of quivering, half merry determination. Mentally
lost, Mr. Blenkinsop was firm in his seat. He knew not
why he had to stay there, but stay there he would and,
indifferent to everything but this duty, he endured the
confusion of voices and laughter, the danger to his patent
leather toes from all these young people pushing past
him, carefully avoided the eye of Mrs. Spenser-Smith,
and calculated that Robert Corder—now talking to
another minister who had just arrived and who also wore
a frock coat and had a sleek black head—would ignore
the presence of his deserter.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Can’t you talk about something?’ Hannah asked
sharply.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ he said obediently. ‘I was going to tell you that
I’m looking for a little house in the country.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Good gracious! Are you going to start farming too?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not exactly, but I want a little house with a bit of
land.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And do you expect me to tell you where to find it?
Are you going to live in it yourself?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not exactly,’ he repeated, and though he looked
embarrassed, his confidences continued. ‘You see, the
present state of things can’t last.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Which?’ Hannah asked perversely.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Blenkinsop frowned again. ‘With the Riddings.
But we don’t want to talk about it till things are settled.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘They’re never settled,’ Hannah warned him. ‘Take
my word for it. If you want to be comfortable, don’t do
anything.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not what I think is right?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That’s the very worst thing you can do. What other
people think right, if you like, Mr. Blenkinsop, but not
what you do. That’s the advice I give you out of my own
experience.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, I’ve been doing nothing in particular for forty
years and now that I’ve started I’m going my own way,
and it was you who laughed at me for living behind the
gilded bars, you know.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, don’t blame me!’ she cried.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But it’s no good being off with the old love before you
are on with the new.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But aren’t you on with it?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Getting towards it,’ Mr. Blenkinsop said, smiling
slyly. ‘But first I want to find the little house.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And if you do,’ she said, speaking slowly because she
was thinking of two things at once and watching the
owner of the sleek black head making towards her deviously
but surely, ‘it will bother you for the rest of your
days—I know all about these little houses—for when it
comes to hard tacks, Mr. Blenkinsop, if you know what
they are, for I don’t—but then, you’ve got what they call
an independent income, haven’t you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I shouldn’t do it if I couldn’t afford it,’ he said, a little
stiffly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And that,’ she said, ‘is just the difference between you
and me,’ and Mr. Blenkinsop turned from her, who had
spoken the last words on an upward and then a descending
breath, to the man at whom she was looking with a little
questioning lift of the brows.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This was the minister with the black head and Mr.
Blenkinsop took a great dislike to him. He was interrupting
an important conversation, and he was objectionable
in himself and in his unctuous smile as he addressed
Miss Mole, saying he thought they had met before.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Miss Mole shook her head. ‘I don’t think so,’ she said.
‘I have a very good memory for faces, but if I’ve seen
yours before I’ve quite forgotten it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But you’re Miss Mole, aren’t you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, I’m Miss Mole.’ Then she smiled with the
vividness which always startled Mr. Blenkinsop. ‘I
wonder if you’re thinking of my cousin,’ she said. ‘Another
Mole.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Is her name Hannah?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, Hilda. There’s supposed to be a strong family
likeness. Oh, don’t go, Mr. Blenkinsop!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But we’re going to play Clumps,’ said the voice of
Mrs. Spenser-Smith, ‘and I want Mr. Blenkinsop to be
one of those to go outside. Mr. Corder will be one, of
course, and Mr. Pilgrim, perhaps you’ll be another.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>She swept them both away and it was some time
before Mr. Blenkinsop could see more of Miss Mole,
for they were in different clumps, than a small steady
head among many other heads, like those of bathers,
bobbing above a sea of coloured dresses.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXIX</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>After supper, one of those little rumours, which start
mysteriously and surprise no one so much as the people
to whom they refer, began running about Mrs. Spenser-Smith’s
drawing-room. For a skilfully long time she
pretended not to hear it, but the moment arrived, and it
was hastened by Ernest’s clumsy kindness, when it
was impossible to resist the knowledge that Mr. Pilgrim
could recite. Solo performances were against her rule.
She knew what sort of talent the members of the chapel
possessed, its devastating effect on the gaiety of her
parties and the little jealousies that could arise, but
Mr. Pilgrim was a newcomer, invited, as a lonely bachelor,
at Ernest’s particular desire, and though she doubted his
ability and disliked singling him out for honour, she
could not refuse the eager requests of those ladies, of all
ages, who were thrilled by the presence of another and a
new minister and begged her to let him recite, nor could
she ignore Ernest’s open persuasions of the apparently
reluctant Mr. Pilgrim. It was noticeable that no other
male voice joined in the solicitations, and that even the
thinnest-necked of the young men, to whom a minister
was a natural object of veneration, put his back against
the wall and settled his features into an expression he
hoped they would be able to maintain.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah longed for Wilfrid but, lacking him, she found
some consolation in watching Uncle Jim’s unguarded
look of amazement and Robert Corder’s earnestness to
do as he would be done by, and when she met the eyes
of Samuel Blenkinsop, who stood among the other young
men against the opposite wall, she felt that she was more
than compensated for the loss of Wilfrid. Mr. Blenkinsop
was looking at her with a solemn dismay, as though she
was his only hope in this calamity, and though she had not
much time to give to anyone, being anxious not to miss
a word or a gesture of Mr. Pilgrim’s performance, or to
lose one drop of her revenge for his persistence in dogging
her with glances all the evening, it was very pleasant
to know that it was her eye Mr. Blenkinsop had sought.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Pilgrim was a tragedian and he did not spare
himself. The long poem he recited was all too short for
the enraptured Hannah, and if the clapping at the end did
not express a correspondence with her own feelings, Mr.
Pilgrim was not a prey to doubts. He wiped his face
with the freedom of the man who has obviously done his
utmost, and Mrs. Spenser-Smith managed, with great
adroitness, to start another game as she went forward to
thank him. Ethel was thanking him already; she had no
doubts either, but, for the first time in the history of
Mrs. Spenser-Smith’s parties, there were no charades.
The games went merrily on until Miss Patsy Withers’s
elder sister was whispered towards the piano and the
opening bars of Sir Roger de Coverley were played.
Robert Corder partnered Mrs. Spenser-Smith, Ernest
tucked the hand of the shabbiest of the spinsters under
his kind arm and seemed to regret that he could not take
care of all the other women who were not wanted, and
Hannah, smiling gaily at him as he passed and trying to
look as though she did not want to dance, saw Ethel
beaming in her place opposite to Mr. Pilgrim and Ruth
happy with her Uncle Jim.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Could you bear it?’ Mr. Blenkinsop asked her crossly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I should love it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I generally get away before this begins, I feel such a
fool, capering down the room with my hands out.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘From <span class='it'>capra</span>, a goat,’ Hannah murmured to herself.
‘But if we’re capering together—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That’s what I thought,’ he admitted gloomily. ‘Is
there any chance of walking home with you? It would do
me good to talk to somebody about that recitation.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Somebody?’ Hannah said sharply. ‘Try Mrs. Ridding.
Yes, try her as a sort of test. There ought to be a preliminary
examination for every vocation, you know, and if
she fails in the subject of Mr. Pilgrim, I should plough
her altogether.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t know what you’re talking about,’ Mr. Blenkinsop
said with a trace of sulkiness, as they took their places
for the dance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And anyhow,’ Hannah bent towards him to whisper,
‘Mr. Corder doesn’t approve of followers. It would embarrass
me to be escorted across the Downs by a single
gent. I have to pay for my pleasures, Mr. Blenkinsop!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was more annoyance than amusement in his
smile. Apparently this sort of banter was not to his
taste and, either in expression of his disapproval, or in
deference to her wish, there was no sign of him when the
Beresford Road party started across the Downs followed
by Mrs. Spenser-Smith’s regret that, for some unexplained
reason, she could not send them in the car.</p>

<p class='pindent'>They went in pairs, like a girls’ school; Uncle Jim with
Howard, and Ethel and Ruth in an accidental companionship
which left their father with Miss Mole.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘This is the first time we have not had charades,’ he
burst out, like a disappointed child. ‘I can’t remember
one of Mrs. Spenser-Smith’s parties when we haven’t
had charades after supper. We choose a word, Miss Mole,
and as I am always expected to be the leader of one of the
sides, I’d given a little thought to the matter, to save time.
I don’t grudge that and the whole thing is of no importance,
but I must say I think the party was not quite so successful
this year.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Mrs. Spenser-Smith is a clever woman,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Certainly. Yes. But I think she showed less cleverness
than usual.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Clever—and considerate, to us and to Mr. Pilgrim.
He would have expected to be the leader of the other
side. We had seen him as a tragedian; we might have had
to listen to him being funny. Considerate to all of us,
but more considerate to him,’ she added in a slow, droll
tone, and Mr. Corder laughed so suddenly and loudly
that his daughters looked round as they walked in front,
and Howard and Uncle Jim, still further ahead, slackened
their pace and turned to see who had joined the little
company and made Robert Corder laugh as he seldom
laughed in the family.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘So you didn’t enjoy the recitation?’ he asked with
some eagerness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It was one of the brightest moments of my life,’ she
replied, ‘but then, I’m afraid I am not charitable.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>There was a pause before Robert Corder, having
digested this, said kindly, ‘But I’m glad to find you have
a sense of humour, Miss Mole. A sense of humour,
I sometimes think, is as valuable a possession as brains.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then I must try to cultivate mine,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘However,’ he said, following her into the tramcar in
which the others already sat, four tired-looking people in
the otherwise empty, brightly lit conveyance, ‘I am sorry
we both had to exercise it to-night. I’m afraid Mr. Pilgrim
made himself rather ridiculous and it was lucky for him
that his own people did not hear him. Though,’ he added
with satisfaction, ‘they might have missed the absurdity.
They are not a highly intelligent little community,’ and
putting his hand into his pocket, for the fares, he fell
into talk with the conductor who, like most of the conductors
in Radstowe, was an acquaintance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah saw that, to the young man clipping the
tickets, Robert Corder was a fine reverend with no nonsense
about him, and she knew it was not fair to judge
him by the only side he showed her. It seemed to her
that he had to be given a certain character before he could
live up to it, and that if his children would see him as the
conductor did, he would be the kind of father he thought
he was. Perhaps everybody was like that, she mused, but
when she looked at Uncle Jim, she saw a man unaffected
by opinion and quite unconscious of himself as a possible
object of interest to anyone. That, probably, was the
happy thing to be, and it was what poor Ethel certainly
was not. Like her father, but without his self-assurance
and with less stability, and urged by her pitiful desire for
love, she reacted violently to appreciation, and Mr.
Pilgrim had taken her in to supper, he had chosen her for
the dance, and the hard words just uttered by the father
she admired were painful, but of no critical value, when
she remembered the kind looks of the man who seemed to
admire her, and she cast distrustful glances at the two
who had been discussing him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Looking at the young Corders, at Ethel with the flush
of excitement on her cheeks and gleams of resentment in
her eyes, and yet with a mouth willing to smile, at Ruth,
tired and leaning contentedly against her uncle, and at
Howard, sitting in the far corner of the tramcar, as
though to mark his spiritual distance from his father,
Hannah renewed her unreasonable feeling of responsibility
for them all, and now it was not Ruth, but Ethel,
who demanded most of her. This change might have
been due to the knowledge that Ruth was safely hers and
Ethel was still a half-conquered country, and Hannah
would have been ready enough to accept this less creditable
explanation if the truth had not lain in her conviction
that Ruth was fundamentally less helpless than
Ethel. She had some of Hannah’s own qualities under
the layer of nervousness her conditions had imposed on
her, and Hannah could liken her, as she had so often
likened herself, to the little ship in the bottle, sailing
gallantly and alone, but towards a surer harbour than
Hannah’s, with her Uncle Jim for port in a storm,
while Ethel rolled helplessly at the mercy of winds and
tides, defenceless against piracy, starvation, thirst, and all
those Acts of God which would be no less lamentable on
account of their name. Hannah wondered if Mr. Pilgrim
was a pirate or a pilot. Probably, he intended to be
neither, but his intentions counted for little, in their
emotional effect, compared with Ethel’s wishes and ready
credence. Poor Ethel, ready to make a hero of Mr.
Pilgrim, Hannah thought, and her compassion turned
suddenly against herself, and changed to scorn, for she
had been as foolish and as pitiable as Ethel and she
was as much Mr. Pilgrim’s prey, and a little panic
came over her, not for her future, though that was
desperate enough, but for her sad little past, held and
turned over in Mr. Pilgrim’s soft, damp hands.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Nevertheless, her future had to be thought of and when
they alighted at the end of Beresford Road, and the same
procession walked up the street, she took advantage of
Robert Corder’s restrained but evident approval of the
woman who had laughed at Mr. Pilgrim, to make her
first request. She hoped Mr. Corder would be able to
spare her for a whole day, before long; she had business
to do in the country.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Why, certainly, Miss Mole. We must manage as best
we can without you, and if I can be of any help—But if
your business has to do with the tenancy of your farm,
you should consult a lawyer. Mr. Wyatt, one of my
deacons, is a sound lawyer and he tells me ladies are
generally too trustful in business dealings.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, I suppose we are,’ Hannah said, including herself
among the trustful ladies.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Too ready to make arrangements by word of mouth,
and he would advise you well, I am sure, and make a
nominal charge, at my request.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Thank you,’ Hannah said. She had seen Mr. Wyatt,
taking round the offertory plate: he did not slip past the
poorer members of the congregation, as Ernest Spenser-Smith
took care to do; she doubted his liberality of
pocket or opinion and, as she glanced up at Robert
Corder, striding beside her, sure of himself and his little
world, stepping over crevasses he did not see, blind to
the clouds confronting him, amiably companioning the
woman whose virtue he took for granted, because all
decent, useful women were virtuous, Hannah’s long
nose took on its derisive twist. There were several
shocks awaiting Robert Corder, but she thought his
chief suffering would come from the memory of his
gradual softening towards the bad Miss Mole.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXX</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah’s cousin Hilda had developed into a definite
person before Hannah went to bed, but it was just as well
to know everything about her and, when it was all
settled, Hannah liked her very much and as good as
believed in her existence. She had some of the characteristics
of the people who used to live in the kitchen
cupboard; she would come out when she was wanted
and, in the meantime, it was nice to feel that she was
there, for her own sake as well as for her possible uses,
and as the creator is not satisfied until someone else
has seen his work, so Hannah longed to produce
her cousin for inspection. By the time she had dressed,
the next morning, Hilda, that wayward, charming
girl, impulsive, but sound at heart, was woven into the
substance of Hannah’s youth and it seemed a pity not
to entertain Ruth with stories of their escapades: there
was the time when they were chased by the bull, for
instance, and Hilda had nobly diverted his attention from
Hannah, but, as it happened, Ruth was in no need of
entertainment that day, for she was confronted with an
event which demanded all her horrified, trembling
attention.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was on this day that Howard vanished like a shadow,
without a sound, or like some wild beast slipping into the
forest without the snap of a twig for warning, and in the
excitement that followed, the rage, the bewilderment,
the demands for explanations, the grief and tears, Uncle
Jim stood calm and stolid in his certainty that he had done
right to let the animal escape. There was a story Hannah
had often heard told in her childhood about some resident
in their countryside—dead before her time—who had
made himself famous and infamous for giving shelter
to a hunted fox and withstanding the clamour of the
hounds and the abuse of the huntsmen, and she thought
of him when she looked at Uncle Jim. But it was hardly
fair to compare Robert Corder with a hunter: he was
more like a man who had brought up, and thought he
had tamed, some creature he half despised, yet took a
pleasure in having about him, and he had lost it through
the treachery of one of his own household. This, however,
was far too simple a metaphor for a complicated
position. He had been outraged as a father and, as a
father, he was responsible for Howard’s scurvy treatment
of Mrs. Spenser-Smith. How was he to explain matters
to her and how would she explain them to his congregation?
Was he to repeat his brother-in-law’s statement
that he had advised Howard against dealing frankly
with his father, had told him it would be a waste of time
and would make bad blood between them, and had persuaded
the boy to take the opening that had been offered
to him on a South African fruit farm and leave his uncle
to stand the racket? Those were Jim’s words and Robert
Corder was more enraged with him than with his son.
He was genuinely and bitterly hurt by what he saw as a
perverse cruelty, he was shocked at such an estimate of
his sympathetic understanding, but it was inevitable that
he should immediately calculate the impression this
extraordinary behaviour would make on his world, of
which the chapel was only a part. If he owned to a bad
son, there would be people ready enough to imply that
the father was to blame, yet with what other story was
he to approach Mrs. Spenser-Smith? He could not
conscientiously take the fault on himself, but when he
rehearsed what he should say to her, his pride, and perhaps
his love, forbade him to show her the picture of
Howard which he saw himself.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He tried to shut his mind against the things Jim had
told him quietly, as though they were accepted facts,
unjust things about his character and his treatment of
Howard and his incapacity to see another person’s point
of view. He had said, in so many words, that if the boy
was to escape from the net Mrs. Spenser-Smith and his
father had spun for him, it must be done on the instant,
with a sudden break: he would never have been able to
disentangle himself gradually from reproaches of ingratitude
and that gentle bullying of which he had had
too much. He would have stayed where he was rather
than have struggled without dignity, but he had gone
and Robert must make the best of it. It was bad now,
but it would be better later on, and when the two met
again they would find themselves feeling more kindly
towards each other than they had ever done before.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It is difficult to quarrel with a man who refuses to be
ruffled, but Robert Corder managed to do it with the
man who was quietly insulting him, as the anxious
listeners in the next room could tell, and at the end of this
angry eloquence, Jim suggested, still mildly, that Robert
might like to pay back what Mrs. Spenser-Smith had
spent on Howard and, if so, he would let him have the
money. He was willing to pay for his undertaking, he
was glad to buy the boy what he wanted, what all the
Erleys wanted, he added, and Robert, angry, resentful,
in a quandary about this money business, and foreseeing
his own compliance, was still curious enough to ask,
unwillingly, what it was that the Erleys wanted. Uncle
Jim became less articulate when his own feelings were in
question. He mumbled that it was what had sent him to
sea, and made his sister feel like a hen in a coop.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Robert Corder repeated these last words, slowly, as
though he could not understand them, and then, realising
their cruel import, he struck his desk a hard blow so that
Mrs. Corder’s silver-framed photograph let out a little
jingle, like laughter, and: ‘You can leave my house!’ he
cried, in a great voice. ‘You’re trying to take my wife
from me now!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Don’t be a fool, Bob. I’m not saying she wasn’t fond
of you, but she was cramped. I’m sorry if I’ve hurt your
feelings, but I still think I’ve done right—and what she
would have wanted me to do.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>He left the room but he had no intention of leaving
the house immediately. In his experience, the man who
shouted his commands was not the one who expected
them to be obeyed, and though he had enough imagination
to divine the needs of those he loved—and his
sister’s children were dear to him for her sake—he could
not picture the real distress of Robert Corder whose
imaginative powers were concentrated on himself. His
son! His wife! Mrs. Spenser-Smith and the chapel!
The fellow members of his committees, who all knew he
had a son at Oxford! The ingratitude and cowardliness
of Howard! And how could his wife have been cramped
when she shared her husband’s life? Yet he thought of
her strange visits to Mr. Samson and he knew he had
consistently sneered at Howard. He admitted that he
was not perfect: no doubt he had made mistakes, but,
where his wife was concerned, he could see none, and he
felt a slight, unconfessed easing of his duty towards the
dead.</p>

<p class='pindent'>His thoughts were too tumultuous, too painful and too
sad for clearness. He was more unhappy than he had
ever been before, and neither of his daughters had offered
him a word of comfort, but already he was adapting
himself to new conditions, hearing his own remarks and
seeing himself as he went about his work with undiminished
spirit, disappointed but tolerant, and gradually
acknowledging that Howard had been right and quoting
extracts from his letters. But it was very lonely in the
study that night, and when Miss Mole came in with his
tea he was glad to see her, but he thought of Miss Patsy
Withers who would have been tenderly indignant for
him and more helpful in her tearfulness and her pity
than Miss Mole, with her swift, sure movements and her
matter-of-fact face.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ve cut you some sandwiches,’ she said, ‘as you didn’t
have much supper.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That is very kind.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And I hope you’ll eat them.’ She was pouring out his
tea and remembering that he liked one big and one small
lump of sugar.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘This is a bad business, Miss Mole,’ he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ she agreed. She was, indeed, sorry for him and
thought he had been unfairly treated. She was sorry for
Howard too, for Ethel and for Ruth: she was suffering
the discomfort of seeing everybody’s point of view and
the impatience of considering it all unnecessary. ‘But
when you think of the sun and the moon and the stars—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What have they to do with it?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Nobody knows,’ she replied, ‘but they do make our
affairs seem rather small beer, don’t they? And if you
compare infinity—whatever that is—with three weeks,
for in about three weeks all this will be forgotten—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I shall never forget it,’ he said, his head in his
hands.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, but other people will, and that’s what really
matters. That’s our weakness—and our strength. There’s
no shame,’ she said, as though to herself, ‘no disappointment,
no disillusionment, we can’t bear if we can keep it
to ourselves. It’s the beastly curiosity and the beastly
speculations of other people that get one on the raw.
But no,’ she was faithful to her creed, ‘it’s not beastly.
It’s natural. I’d do it myself.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then,’ he said, forgetting, in the relief of speech, to
be superior, ‘you can understand how I feel.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I do!’ she cried, and he said sadly, from the depths of
an experience denied to her. ‘But no. You are not a
parent, Miss Mole.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>She gave him one of her sidelong glances. ‘You take a
good deal for granted,’ she said, trying to control the
upward tilt of her lips. ‘But you happen to be right,’ she
went on with a calmness which left him displeased, but
dumb, ‘I’m not a parent. I’m not a minister, either, or a
son, and yet, somehow .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Please eat these sandwiches.
Minced ham and turkey. They’re very good. And it
isn’t so difficult for you as it seems.’ She spoke to him
quietly, as though she persuaded a child to its good.
‘Your son had a sudden offer in South Africa, an out-of-door
life is really what he is fitted for, he had to take it
or leave it, so he cabled his reply and went off at once
and there was no time for explanations.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘So that was what cost fifteen shillings,’ Robert Corder
muttered. ‘And Mrs. Spenser-Smith, who has been so
generous?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I should tell her as much of the truth as is good for
her—and you. That’s only fair to yourself.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I shall pay back the money!’ he said loudly and with
determination.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then she can’t complain, and I don’t believe she will.
Good night, Mr. Corder.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Good night, Miss Mole.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>This time, he did not call her back, but she returned.
She stood with her hands clasped in front of her, smiling
timidly and looking pleasingly diffident, and more like
his idea of what a woman should be than he had ever
seen her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I wonder .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ she began, and he said briskly, with a
defensive caution at the back of his mind. ‘Well, Miss
Mole, what is it?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Could you pretend,’ she said, ‘not to be as angry as
you are?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m not angry, but deeply hurt.’ Her silence accepted
the paraphrase and he added, with his usual authority,
‘And pretence of any kind is against my rule.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her eyes widened, she looked remarkably child-like
and that gaze made him uneasy. He was beginning to
know her well enough to expect some retort in violent
contrast to the expression of her odd, mobile face, but it
did not come.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I was thinking of Ruth,’ she said. ‘And Ethel. Yes,
she has asked me to call her Ethel,’ she said quickly, in
answer to the slight contraction of his brows. ‘They are
very unhappy.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That is my son’s responsibility. We must all suffer
together.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But don’t suffer at all,’ she suggested. ‘If you can’t
pretend, the only thing to do is not to feel. You can’t
have people thinking your son has done something wrong.
In your position,’ she added softly. ‘And Ethel and Ruth
are very much worried about you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘They’ve shown no signs of it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah,’ she said, ‘they’re a little afraid of you. You can
be rather terrible, Mr. Corder, if you’ll forgive my saying
so. They are sitting in there, shivering and trying not
to cry. Could you make them realise that you have the
situation in hand, that there’ll be nothing for them to do
but follow your lead? Ethel is troubling herself about
Mrs. Spenser-Smith and wondering what she is to say
to her—and to everybody else.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Robert Corder did not fail in his response. ‘There is no
need for Ethel to distress herself,’ he said. ‘She can leave
it to me. I shall go and see Mrs. Spenser-Smith to-morrow.
I suppose there are troubles in every family
and some day she may have some of her own.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I should think it’s more than likely,’ Hannah said.
She glanced at the clock. ‘I must write a letter before
I go to bed. I shall just have time to catch the post.
Good night, Mr. Corder.’ She hesitated and said, with
the timidity he found very becoming in her, ‘I shall tell
your daughters they must try to be as brave as you are,’
but as she left the study, she was telling herself that one
of his children was free and she must do what she could
to secure liberty for the others.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXXI</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>To see Robert Corder reassuring his children, gravely
taking this new burden on himself and shouldering it
courageously, was for Hannah, rather like watching a
man palming off the work of an artist as his own, and she
wondered he did not see the pathos, the tacit reproach, of
Ethel’s surprised admiration for him and of the relief
which flushed Ruth’s face, but, after all, it did not matter
to Hannah why he acted well so long as he did it, and she
remembered that her suggestions had been successful,
not because she was skilful, but because they were practical.
If he was to keep his picture of his broad-minded,
optimistic self, he must take Howard’s departure and give
it his approval in a wise, fore-sighted spirit; only so could
he mount his pulpit on Sunday and feel that he still
dominated his people. There are certain kinds of sorrow
which add to a man’s value, but that of possessing a bad
son is not one of them, and Robert Corder decided not
to have it. That, at least, was Hannah’s criticism of his
behaviour.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth had her own comment to make, though she put
it as a question which was not meant to be enlightening.
She had the appearance, Hannah thought, as she lit the
night-light, of a person who has had a severe bout of
pain, and lies limp and contented in its cessation. Her
face, which softened and hardened so quickly, seemed to
have taken on childish contours, but her eyes, drowsy
with comfort, kept their look of guarded intelligence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Isn’t it wonderful,’ she sighed, ‘not to be as miserable
as you thought you were going to be?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Is it? I don’t know. I’m never miserable.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, you must have been, often, when you were
young.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘There was always something else,’ Hannah said.
‘There’s always something else, when you look for it.
But no, I wasn’t unhappy when I was young. There
were my boots, of course, but there were the feet inside
them and, you know, if I’d had the kind of boots I wanted,
my feet wouldn’t have been so pretty now, and I suppose
I realised, even then, that it was all for the best. I’ve
always been good at that.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’re very conceited about your feet. And people
don’t notice feet much.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What does that matter to me? I notice them myself,
and every night I have a little reception for them. They
sit at one end of the bed and I sit at the other and I look
at my nice straight toes and all the little bones of my feet
and think of the manifold works of God. It’s not conceit.
I didn’t make them.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But you like them more because they’re yours than you
would if they were mine.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps; they’re such a surprise. My father and mother
had honest yeomen’s feet and so has Lilla.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Lilla? That’s Mrs. Spenser-Smith’s name.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Did I say Lilla? I meant Hilda.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Who’s she?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, she’s a cousin, rather a mysterious cousin. I’ll
tell you about her some day. She was better looking than
me, but not much, and her feet were ugly. Nice hands,
though, and she used to say that if she and I could pick
out our best features, we might make one quite decent-looking
woman of us.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Is she alive now?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Good gracious, yes, I hope so. Somewhere. She’s no
older than I am, but I haven’t seen her for years. Elusive
creature,’ Hannah said, staring at the little flame of the
night-light.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Go on about her.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not now. Good night.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Moley .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.’ this was Ruth’s question, ‘was Father
angry when you took in his tea? I know he was furious
with Uncle Jim, because we heard him shouting, and
I never thought he’d come in and be so nice to us.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But as it wasn’t your fault, why should he be angry
with you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth made no reply to that; there was none to make and
she did not refer to past experience. It was plain to
Hannah that Ruth was giving credit where credit was due,
and it was sad that she should have to look beyond her
father’s character for the cause of his unexpected gentleness.
‘Well, I hope he’ll stop being angry with Uncle
Jim,’ she said. ‘I’ll tell you what I’ve decided. I shall go
out to South Africa, to be with Howard, as soon as I can.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And what about me?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Couldn’t you stay and look after Father?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m here to look after you because you’re such a baby
and can’t mend your own stockings. As soon as you can,
I shall go.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Is that why you haven’t tried to make me do it?’ Ruth
asked slyly. ‘And why shouldn’t you come too?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t know why I didn’t go years ago,’ Hannah said.
‘What a fool I’ve been!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘There was your little house.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ she said, ‘perhaps that had something to do with
keeping me, but there, I never had enough money to pay
my fare and I never shall have.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That’s because you’re so extravagant about your shoes,
Ruth said pertly. ‘And that reminds me. There’s the
story about breaking the window, and now there’s your
cousin Hilda. You’re always promising and never
telling.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I can’t tell you about the window because the story
isn’t finished. Neither is the one about Cousin Hilda, for
that matter. Stories don’t finish. The window one is
coming to what you might call a period, but not an end.
No indeed. I fancy that Part Two will be less exciting
but more enthralling to the student of human nature than
Part One. Really good biographies can’t be written until
the what-you-may-call-thems are dead. But I might tell
you when we’re in South Africa,—far away.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Couldn’t you just give me a hint about why you broke
the window? Was it in Radstowe?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not a hint,’ Hannah said. ‘Why can’t you make up
some stories for yourself? That’s what I have to do.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But these are true, aren’t they?’ Ruth cried anxiously.
‘Not like the burglar one?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not in the least like the burglar one. And now, sleep.
If you’re going to South Africa, you must take a profession
with you and you’ll never have one if you stay awake till
this time of night. Be anything you like, but be something.
Simply being a useful woman like me isn’t good
enough.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’re good enough for me,’ Ruth said, shutting her
eyes on the awkwardness of this confession.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah went upstairs and stood in the darkness of her
bedroom. For the first time she heard her own true story
with Ruth’s ears and she did not like the sound of it, and
Ruth did not repeat her assertion that Miss Mole was
good enough for her. She was mute, stricken, all her
faiths shaken, what she had seen as beauty changed to
ugliness, her sight, perhaps incurably, dimmed or distorted,
and this was Hannah’s work. Apart from the
consequences of her acts on the innocent, the undreamed
of, her adult conscience was not troubled. Her regrets
were for her lack of judgment, not for a chastity which
did not seem to her to be sensibly diminished. She had
loved her lover and expected to marry him, but she did
not make that expectation an excuse. She did not need
an excuse. Her values were not those of Robert Corder
and Beresford Road Chapel and she was heartily thankful
that there was no legal bond, but she was unhappy when
she tried to exchange her own conscience for Ruth’s
juvenile one, and what Ruth made of the story would
chiefly depend on who presented it to her. If it were her
father or her sister, all these happy hours they had had
together would be smeared by their disgust. And yet
Hannah had a heartening belief in the independence of
Ruth’s mind and her natural tendency to go contrary to
her relatives: moreover, they were not likely to tell her
much. Miss Mole would disappear mysteriously, her
name would not be spoken, and Ruth’s silent loyalty
might be strengthened by her secret defiance, yet she
might be disillusioned, though she was still loyal. No
woman, not even Hannah, who had made a practice of
indifference to most people’s opinions, could relish the
prospect of being thought evil, but it was the effect on
Ruth herself about which she was really troubled, and it
seemed to her hard that what she had done ten years ago
should have its influence on a child of whose existence
she had not known, so hard and unreasonable that her
sanity refused to take the weight of this responsibility
and, as she stood there, meditating immediate flight, her
commonsense resisted a temptation which, indeed, was
not very alluring, for where was she to go and what good
would she be doing Ruth if she left the field to Mr. Pilgrim?
And perhaps her cousin Hilda would save her
from him as she had saved her from the bull. No, she
told herself, undressing in the darkness which clarified
her thoughts, the worst thing she could do was to waste
the powers which had been signally proved this evening.
Through her means, Ruth and Ethel had gone comparatively
happily to bed and all her calculations were
grossly wrong if Robert Corder did not return cheerfully
from his interview with Lilla, for by the first post, she would
learn that the occasion for discreet behaviour had arrived.
And, during the interview in which they tried to make
things easy for each other, Hannah hoped Robert Corder
would speak enthusiastically of his housekeeper. That
would give Lilla something to worry about, she
chuckled, as she got into bed, and she thought she would
be almost willing to sacrifice herself maritally to Robert
Corder, if she got the chance, for the sake of supplanting
Lilla as leading lady of the chapel, a short-lived joy for
a long martyrdom, but she knew that he would only
praise her in flattery of Lilla and that he was in happy
ignorance of his indebtedness to Miss Mole.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was difficult to endure his look of self-satisfaction
the next evening. A stranger would have thought he had
planned his son’s escape and made Mrs. Spenser-Smith
a party in the enterprise, and Hannah had another
glimpse into the life of Mrs. Corder, who, surely, must
have wilted and perhaps actually died, under the blandly
arrogant delusions of her husband. The face which looked
out of its silver frame was that of a woman with delicate
perceptions who would find more truth in Mr. Samson’s
extravagant inventions than in Robert Corder’s interpretation
of his acts and thoughts, but, no doubt, her
chief desire, like Hannah’s, was for the happiness of her
children and she had borne with her husband as wives
find it necessary to do.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This was Hannah’s view of their relationship and Uncle
Jim had given her no cause to change or amplify it. He,
at least, did not yield to Hannah’s wiles. Under his
matter-of-fact directness, he was not simple; he seemed
able to guess the destination of Hannah’s conversation,
when it was Mrs. Corder, though she might start in the
opposite direction, and she gave him up. When she
saw him go, the next day, she would be almost as poor in
information as she was when he arrived and this was
hardly fair, for he had constantly questioned her about
farming and expressed his regret that he could not see
her little place. He would be a good tenant when she
wanted another one. The place would suit him very
well, he thought; it was near enough to Radstowe and he
wanted to keep an eye on Ruth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, one never knows,’ Hannah said. ‘You’d better
leave me your address. I suppose,’ she went on thoughtfully,
‘I’ve got another twenty years of work left in me.
My tenant may not last as long as that and, while I’m
working, you could be paying me rent. And I’ll charge
you a high one too, for depreciation of my property.
Then, at sixty, I’ll turn you out and retire. But the
difficulty is that if I lose this job, I may not get another.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Why should you lose it? But look here, if you do,
you’ve got to let me know. I’m going to wander about
for a bit, but my bank will always find me.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Are you thinking of kidnapping Ruth, too?’ Hannah
asked coolly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ll have a shot,’ he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And Ethel?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, I don’t think I need kidnap Ethel. I’m hoping
she’ll get married. Who was that black-haired chap who
made such a fool of himself at the party? I thought they
seemed pretty friendly.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Would you like her to marry him?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’d like her to marry anybody, so long as he didn’t
drink or knock her about,’ he said, and increased Hannah’s
respect for his astuteness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But perhaps it will be Mr. Corder who gets married.
There are plenty of ladies in the congregation who would
meet him more than half way.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, I spotted one of those, too,’ he said. ‘The fair,
floppy one. No use to Ruth at all. I wish to goodness,’ he
said, knocking his pipe out against the grate, ‘you’d
marry him yourself.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Anything to oblige you, of course,’ Hannah said
dryly, and then, flaring up, she cried: ‘Upon my word,
I think you’re the most unscrupulous person I ever met.’</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXXII</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>In the few days that passed between Uncle Jim’s departure
and Wilfrid’s return, there was an atmosphere of
unnatural sweetness in the Corders’ house. Ethel’s
gratitude to her father, for refraining from making her
suffer for Howard’s fault, transformed her into the sunny
daughter of an indulgent parent, but Ruth, with the
cynicism which both pleased and saddened Hannah,
treasured these good moments because she did not believe
they would last. Robert Corder, however, had adopted
an attitude and he kept it, and Hannah, who found it
impossible to attribute a good motive to him if she could
find a bad one, saw this consistency as a result of his
instinct of self-protection which warned him that if he
was to play a part well he must play it all the time. Before
many days were over, he had merged himself into his
role and she wondered whether there had been any real
suffering at Howard’s treatment of him and any response
to its implications. His was a curious character and, for
all his human weaknesses, she could not believe he was
quite real. She would tell herself that he was a marvellous
puppet, so much like a man that he could deceive most
people, and then, when he came into the house, she had
to admit her consciousness of his personality. Ethel was
in a flutter to please him, Ruth was vigilantly critical,
Hannah herself paid him the tribute of an irritated
delight in watching him, in divining the meaning of his
looks and foretelling his remarks, and these were the
reactions to no puppet. He could absorb the suggestions
that suited him as easily as water takes a colour, yet he
must have had some suggestive power over other people
or they would not have sought him out and gone away
comforted. This was a puzzle which it would take a
lifetime to solve and Hannah was afraid her sands were
running out—for Ethel’s good temper was not all due to
her father’s leniency—and as she saw the silent slipping
of the moments, she was alternately enraged and amused
that, with a few words, Mr. Pilgrim could change the
family friend into a person to be shunned, though her
management, her economy, her cooking, her counsel, all
that made her useful to these people, would remain
unchanged. But there was her cousin Hilda and her own
word against Mr. Pilgrim’s; it became a matter of pride
with her to frustrate him, and there was a strained alertness
about her which no one but Mr. Samson noticed.
It would have been comforting to tell him everything;
he would have listened with a salutary lack of surprise,
but, sane as he was, she could not unwrap her little
secret to his gaze. He was, in fact, too sane to understand
that what he saw in terms of natural, harmless appetite
had had a spiritual value for her which she still struggled
to keep.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She admitted to being tired and Mr. Samson growled
his anxiety about her; he had told that Bible-smiter she
was worth taking care of and would have told him a good
deal more, but for Miss Fitt and the peaky little girl.
He did not want to make trouble that would fall on the
family. And what had Corder wanted, poking his nose
in and waking Mr. Samson out of his afternoon nap?
If he had not thought it was the man with the cat’s meat
he would not have gone to the door, and there he was,
smirking on the step and trying to look like a herald
angel.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I let him know it’s you that’s the angel, just as his
wife was before you. I’m a lucky old devil, finding two
of you at the end of my days, and you wouldn’t think
I’d fancy your kind, to look at me, now would you?
Well, I’ve fancied all sorts, to tell the truth, but it’s the
lively ones I like. A quick tongue’s more use to me than
a pretty face. Now, you take care of yourself. And what
about a bottle of port to drink on the quiet?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, no, it’s a teetotal household.’ Her laughter rang
out. ‘But Mr. Corder had to eat some brandy with his
Christmas pudding! I don’t want any port. I’m going
to have a day’s holiday and spend it in the country.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And that’s a funny idea of a holiday,’ Mr. Samson
said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was certainly a euphemistic description of the expedition
she had planned and for which, knowing that
Ruth would beg to go with her, she had not settled on
the day. It would have been better to wait until the
beginning of the school term, but that was a long way
off and she would have to refuse Ruth a pleasure which,
for her, would be something like a day in Radstowe had
been for Hannah, and Hannah herself, full of shrinking
though she was, had a great longing to see her own country,
to sit in the train and watch the city and its suburbs
giving way to fields and woods, flat meadows cut by
dykes and villages dominated by their stately perpendicular
churches, just as she had watched all these giving
way to the promise of Radstowe, that fairy place of
streets and towers, bridges, water and ships. She would
get her business done as soon as possible, and then she
would cross the fields to the old farm. She did not know
who owned it now, but if they had any likeness to her own
wary but kindly people, they would let her have a peep
into the kitchen, where she ought to have been living
with the red-cheeked children; they would let her stroll
round the farm buildings and have a look at the cows
and, as she sat in the Beresford Road dining-room,
darning the everlasting socks and stockings, she fancied
she could smell the sweet breath of the cows, and the
sweetness of wallflowers, old man and pinks, in the little
garden where the bear had lurked. There would be no
flowers blooming now, unless there was a chance primrose
on a sheltered bank, but the cows would be there, and she
looked at Ruth, sitting on her feet in the old saddle-bag
armchair, and reading with absorption, and thought it
would be cruel to go without the child. Was this an
excuse for procrastination? she asked herself, as there
came a loud knock on the front door which made Ruth
look up and say: ‘Postman, Moley. It may be the fortune.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What fortune?’ Ethel asked. She was trying to alter
one of her many unsatisfactory dresses, but she was
inept, and presently she would ask Miss Mole to gather
her scattered pieces into some semblance of a whole.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If it’s the fortune,’ Hannah said, going towards the
door, ‘I’ll give you each—well, it depends, but I’ll give
you each something.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And she would, you know,’ Ruth said, looking gravely
at Ethel.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The knock had drawn Robert Corder from his study
and he found Miss Mole, in the hall, holding a letter.
‘The postman?’ he asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No. This came by hand, as they say, as though a
postman hadn’t got one.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘For me?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, for me,’ she said and she opened and read it while
he stood there.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not bad news, I hope,’ he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not at all,’ she replied, smiling at him as she tucked
the letter into the bosom of her dress, and returned to
the dining-room.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The smile was still on her lips, though she did not know
it until Ruth cried: ‘And I do believe it really is the
fortune!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Good gracious! Do I look as pleased as all that?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not now. Now you’re frowning a little. Isn’t it
something nice?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That depends on one’s point of view,’ Hannah said,
and Ruth resumed her reading. There were times
when she knew it was of no use to ask Miss Mole any
questions.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah wondered, and was half annoyed at her satisfaction,
but a day in the country with Mr. Blenkinsop
would be a day of inward and outward laughter: she
could not look at him without a bubbling feeling of
pleasure, even his handwriting made her smile and, if
she gave him the day he asked for, she must postpone
her own expedition. This, in itself, was a relief, and to be
looked after as she knew Mr. Blenkinsop would look
after her, to have her ticket taken for her, to be asked if
she were tired, was an alluring prospect to Hannah, who
had spent so much of her time in looking after other
people. But Mr. Blenkinsop took a good deal for granted: he
assumed, and no doubt she had given him cause, that her
interest in Mrs. Ridding was considerable, but to take
her into the country to inspect the little house he had
found—that house, which, no doubt, was to be Mrs.
Ridding’s refuge from her husband—was a dependence
on her judgment which that lady might resent, and it was
a deliberate involving of Mr. Corder’s housekeeper in an
affair which would do her reputation no good. This care
for her reputation satisfactorily explained her slight
feeling of irritation with Mr. Blenkinsop, but it did not
influence her desire to oblige him. Such invitations did
not often come her way and, irritated or not, she liked
Mr. Blenkinsop, and the thought of his companionship,
preoccupied though he might be, for a whole day in the
country, with bare branches against grey skies and pale
fields slipping into brown ones, and the chance of a
primrose, was more than enough to make her smile.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Blenkinsop hoped the following Sunday would
not be an impossible day for her. He was afraid it would
be awkward but—he was quite playful in the excitement
which had made him begin his note without any formality
of address—he also hoped she would be able to produce
the usual grandmother or aunt whose illness or funeral
called her away. Hannah, however, did not need these
ladies, for she had a tenant, and Mr. Corder’s prejudice
against Sunday pleasures would not be applied to business
if she explained that it could be transacted on no other
day. Her trouble was not Mr. Corder; it was lack of
suitable clothing for this outing. She had the shoes, but
she had no well cut tweeds, no gay scarf and jaunty hat.
Life was simpler for men. Their festive occasions were
not brightened or dimmed by the clothes question; it
was dull for them, but easy, and Hannah looked at her
battered headgear and sighed. She counted her little
savings and saw the coins as so many meals and so many
nights of shelter: it would be madness to spend a penny,
but why should she not be mad? There was not much
difference between having food for a month and having
it for a day, and she put her purse in her pocket and
decided to go and look at the shops. The January sales
had begun, and she might pick up a bargain: she might
save a rich old gentleman from being run over and her
future would be secured because she had dared to risk
it, and she set off, believing the miracle was really going
to happen, ready to squander, but possessed of the
pleasant certainty that she could restrain herself if she
chose. This was the right mood in which to go shopping.
The smell of spring in the mild air, the thought of Sunday,
and the purse held firmly in the pocket of her coat,
were like wine to Miss Mole, who walked with her quick,
light tread until she reached the shops, and then she
walked slowly, gazing into the windows, but her exhilaration
left her before she had gone far. She was born
fastidious, and the heaps of clothing, boldly ticketed, did
not attract her. She knew it was better to be decently
shabby than cheaply gay and she retraced her steps up
The Slope, looking back now and then at the beauty she
could get for nothing.</p>

<p class='pindent'>As she neared the top of the hill, she spied the figure
of Lilla bustling down, and a new light came into her
eyes. If she could not have a new hat, she could have
some fun with Lilla, and she greeted her cousin so loudly
and lovingly that Lilla looked round for a retreat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Come in here and have some tea,’ she said, indicating
the shop where they had met on that October evening
when Hannah first saw Mr. Blenkinsop, and Hannah
followed her into the most secluded corner.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ve been wanting to see you,’ Lilla said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You don’t look a bit pleased, dear,’ Hannah said
sadly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m not pleased, but I wanted to tell you that I wish
you’d mind your own business and leave me to mind
mine. I don’t need instructions about how to behave,
Hannah, and your letter was quite unnecessary.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not instructions, dear—only hints. You told me I was
to bark when necessary, so I barked. You put me in that
house to take care of Mr. Corder, and I’m trying to do it.
I thought you’d be glad. Are you paying for this tea,
or am I?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Never mind about that. I want to get to the bottom
of this affair of Howard’s.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I do mind, Lilla. If it’s me, I’m having a bun.
If it’s you, I’ll have buttered toast to start with.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Have anything you like,’ Lilla said grandly. ‘I suppose
that boy is running away from trouble, but of course his
father wouldn’t admit it. He talked a lot of rubbish about
temperament and the open air, and I did my best to make
things easy for him, but he ought to have trusted me.
I’ve a great respect for Robert Corder—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Nothing to what he has for you,’ Hannah said feelingly.
‘I really believe the only thing that worried him about
Howard was the fear that you would be hurt. He has a
noble character, Lilla.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘H’m,’ Lilla said. ‘I’m not satisfied, but I must say
he seemed anxious to return the money I’d spent. Where
he’s going to get it from, I don’t know and, if he can pay
it back, it seems to me that he can’t have needed it. And
that’s not a pleasant thought.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then don’t think it. Just remember that you’re a
lucky woman. If Mr. Corder admired me as he admires
you—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Now don’t begin getting sentimental, Hannah. It’s
no good. He thinks you’re a capable woman, but there
he stops. I took care to find that out.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, did you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, I did. There’s too much nonsense about him in
the chapel already, and really, Patsy Withers made me
feel quite ashamed at my party. What with her and Mr.
Pilgrim—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What was she doing?’ Hannah asked quickly. ‘I didn’t
notice her.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No,’ Lilla said drily, ‘you were too busy monopolising
Mr. Blenkinsop, and I may tell you that Mr. Corder saw
it. It wasn’t fair, Hannah, with so many girls in the
room.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I couldn’t help it, dear. I’ve a fatal sort of attraction
for him. Why is it do you think? I was the belle of the
ball for Mr. Blenkinsop there isn’t a doubt.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I invite young men for the sake of the girls, not for
you to sharpen your wits on, but if I’d known, as Mr.
Corder tells me, that he’d left the chapel, I shouldn’t
have invited him at all. And he wouldn’t have been
missed, as it happened, and that was your fault. Do you
know where he goes?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Goes?’ said Hannah.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What place of worship?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, here and there; here and there. He wants to take
me with him on Sunday.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Stuff!’ Lilla said, but she said it doubtfully. ‘Well,
Mr. Pilgrim isn’t likely to get him, after the exhibition
he made of himself—and that was Ernest’s fault. What
did you think of him?’ she asked, and her bright eyes
sharpened a little. ‘He told me he’d seen you before,
Hannah, and he seemed curious about you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Naturally,’ Hannah said easily. ‘I’ll never get you to
understand that I’m a noticeable character.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And he used to live in your part of the country,’ Lilla
went on, ‘but as you haven’t lived there for years—’ she
sighed. ‘I wish I could feel more comfortable about you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Don’t try,’ Hannah said. ‘I haven’t split on you yet.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m thinking of your own good, Hannah. I didn’t
like the man’s manner at all. If there’s anything I ought
to know, you’d better tell me.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah shook her head. ‘I won’t betray him.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Him?’ Lilla cried.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah smiled in the way Wilfrid loved and Lilla
distrusted.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It hasn’t occurred to you that he might be nervous
about his own little secrets, I suppose?’</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXXIII</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Wilfrid was to return that evening and, as Hannah
walked home slowly, she was glad to think she would see
him soon. He, if anyone could, would restore her liking
for herself. Her little outing had been a failure. She had
not bought a hat; she had told Lilla what amounted to a
lie about Mr. Pilgrim, and, until to-day, Hannah’s
excursions into fiction had always stopped at the injury
of anyone else. Her offence was the greater because she
did not in the least mind injuring Mr. Pilgrim: it was at
her own peculiar kind of integrity she had aimed a blow,
and it would not be the last one. It was a choice between
her integrity and her treasure, and she had not been tender
with her treasure for ten years to have it breathed upon
by Mr. Pilgrim’s outraged sanctimony and revengeful
spite. She was tired and disheartened as she walked
through the streets and she was careless, for once, of the
life about her. She forgot to remind herself that hers was
only a small part in a big drama and that all these men and
women, going home from work or coming from the
opposite direction in search of pleasure, felt the same
overwhelming importance of their lives as she felt of
hers: she forgot her little sermon to Robert Corder about
infinity, the sun, the moon and the stars: she allowed her
own affairs to cast a dun cloud over the whole world, and
the tramcars, like noisy magic lantern slides, the shadows
of trees on the pavements, the sound of her own footsteps
which she had often heard as a sound of advance and adventure,
had lost their significance and beauty. In her
heart there was the unacknowledged belief that with her
lies and evasions she was paying too big a price for what
she was concealing; she would have had to pay no more
for the memory of something perfect, something she
would not have wanted to conceal, and, without actually
making that confession, her mind went on to imagine
what a real love might have been. But such loves do not
come in the way of the Miss Moles of this world, and now
she was nearly forty. And thinking thus, she allowed the
threatening wave of her loneliness, avoided for so long,
to sweep over her, and she stood still in the street, helpless
while it engulfed her. It fell back, leaving her battered,
but on her feet, and longing for a hand to help her upward
before she could be swamped again, but she longed in
vain and it was a weary woman who walked up Beresford
Road and found no comfort in the ruby glow of Mr.
Samson’s window curtains.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She assumed her usual look of competence as soon as
she entered the house. Employers do not expect their
servants to have visible emotions, and professional pride
straightened her back when she went into the dining
room. Yet at the sight of Wilfrid, sitting by the fire and
listening to what his cousins had to tell him, and leaping
to his feet at her appearance, she felt as she had felt
when she opened his Christmas parcel, tearfully grateful
for a liking which was for herself and not for what she
could do for him, and she put her hand on his shoulder
and kissed his cheek, without a thought, as naturally as
though he were her son.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Miss Mole!’ Ethel exclaimed. And in her voice, the
rolling of her eyes, the gleam of her teeth and the checked
spring of her body, Hannah recognised the colt she had
been trying to tame, now scared, shocked and jealous.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes?’ Hannah said pleasantly, but she looked at Ruth
who was smiling stiffly, and Wilfrid, laughing, seized
Hannah’s hand and said dramatically, ‘we have betrayed
ourselves, Mona Lisa, but no gentleman will compromise
a lady and refuse to make honourable amends. You must
marry me!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Wilfrid! She can’t!’ Ethel cried. ‘She’s old enough
to be your mother!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, not quite,’ Hannah begged. She took off her hat
and threw it down. ‘Don’t be so silly, all of you. Are
kisses so scarce among you that you take fright when you
see one? I’m sorry, Wilfrid. Absence of mind!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Don’t spoil it. I’m grateful. Ruth didn’t kiss me,
Ethel didn’t—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I shouldn’t think of doing such a thing! I didn’t even
kiss my own brother.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps that’s why he’s gone to South Africa,’ Wilfrid
said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, you know it isn’t!’ Ethel said helplessly, and Ruth
gave a hard little laugh.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Dear me, dear me, dear me!’ Hannah said. ‘What a
fuss! The only thing I can suggest is that we should kiss
all round and cry quits.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It isn’t that. You know it isn’t, but I think kisses
ought to be sacred, and I don’t see why you should take
such a liberty with Wilfrid.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then I’ll tell you why,’ Hannah said, her body as
tense, her eyes as green and keen, as a watchful cat’s, and
a stillness fell on the little company in the presence of this
new and formidable Miss Mole. She held them like that
for a few seconds and then, satisfied with this small
triumph, she dispersed the thoughts that had been crowding
into speech and smiled benevolently at all three, remembering
that they were children. ‘Because he’s a dear boy,’
she said, ‘and I like him.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Because he’s a man!’ Ethel said with stubborn courage,
and Hannah looked him up and down teasingly and said:
‘Yes, he’ll be a man, some day.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>No one answered her smile, and she felt that there was
an influence in the room of which she knew nothing, and
she believed it was stealthy and malign. She glanced at
Wilfrid and saw that he, too, was puzzled, seeking,
behind that thoughtless kiss, some explanation of the
atmosphere which Ruth and Ethel created between them,
Ethel struggling between caution and the blundering
candour natural to her; Ruth sitting on her feet, her back
pressed against the back of her chair, perched there like
a hard young judge, weighing unspoken evidence against
some person unnamed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I think,’ Ethel said at last, ‘I ought to tell Father,’ and
even now she looked at Hannah for advice, and though
she did not ask for it in words, her expression had a
familiar appeal and a pathos in its offended bewilderment.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Don’t be a fool,’ Wilfrid said. ‘The poor man’s got
enough worry as it is. A son who runs away—! He
doesn’t want to hear about a nephew who has kissed Miss
Mole.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It was Miss Mole who kissed you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, but I kissed back, and jolly quick! Didn’t you
notice?’ His speech fell into its provoking drawl. ‘I call
this exceedingly vulgar. Don’t you, Mona Lisa?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No,’ she said, ‘nothing seems vulgar to me, not really.
There’s something wrong with me, I suppose. It’s
funny,’ she went on, and she leaned forward eagerly,
though she looked at nobody, ‘it’s funny that it’s so easy
to be positive about good things and so difficult about
what are called bad ones. And d’you know why I think
it is? It’s because the good things exist and the bad ones
don’t.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, but Miss Mole—’ Ethel could not resist a discussion
in which she had a sort of professional interest,
though her antagonist was Miss Mole, ‘we know there
are bad things like—like deceit.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, yes, it has a bad name, but get to know the person,
the cause and the circumstances and it may deserve a
good one.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then you think I oughtn’t to tell Father?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m hardly the person to advise you, and this is rather
like a nightmare, but I’ll try. Do you mean about the
kiss?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not only the kiss,’ Ethel muttered, biting her tortured
lips.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth’s voice came clearly. ‘If you do, you’ll have to
tell him that Mr. Pilgrim came to tea.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, has Mr. Pilgrim been? Did he recite?’ Hannah
asked, and there was no one in the world who knew her
well enough to detect the anxiety under her careless
tones.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ethel turned to Ruth. ‘Why shouldn’t I tell him?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Because Father doesn’t like him.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Father doesn’t know him.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That won’t make any difference,’ Ruth said. ‘Moley,
you told me about your cousin Hilda, didn’t you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I didn’t tell you much.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah, but you’re going to. So there, Ethel! But of
course you wouldn’t believe me.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t know who to believe,’ Ethel said, blinking away
her tears.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What on earth are you all talking about?’ Wilfrid
asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And if there’s nothing bad, what’s the use of trying
to be good?’ Ethel asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It isn’t being good to be a sneak.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But how can you help being a sneak if you try to tell
the truth?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You can hold your tongue.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I’m worried!’ Ethel cried. ‘And what does a
little girl like you know about it?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘More than you do, anyhow!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Don’t quarrel, don’t quarrel,’ Hannah begged. ‘This
is the queerest conversation I’ve ever heard. Why doesn’t
anyone else want to laugh?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Because we like listening to you,’ Wilfrid said, ‘and
whatever your sins may be, you’ll go to Heaven. They’ll
give you all the indulgences you need because they’ll
want you in the choir.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I can’t sing a note.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then the choir will go on strike and say they’d rather
hear you talking in your lovely voice.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Have I got a lovely voice?’ Hannah asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Has she?’ said Ethel, and Ruth exclaimed: ‘Oh,
Wilfrid, how sickening of you! I thought nobody knew it
except me,’ and that remark, flattering though it was,
seemed to Hannah indicative of the fiercely individual
attitude of the Corders towards anything they considered
good. They could see trouble in its effect on the family,
as they had shown in the case of Howard’s departure,
which neither Ethel nor Ruth had mentioned as a personal
loss, but they would not share their pleasures.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She had another proof of this in the information Ruth
gave her, later, about Mr. Pilgrim’s visit. She had been
allowed to have tea with him and Ethel, but, afterwards,
Ethel had got rid of her, and Hannah easily imagined her
clumsy efforts at tact. ‘And she needn’t have bothered,’
Ruth said. ‘I didn’t want to stay. I think he’s a horrid
man. He smiles too much and his teeth don’t fit. They
click, too And Ethel was so grinny and giggly, till Mr.
Pilgrim began talking about you and saying he was sorry
to miss you,’ and here Ruth paused and looked at Hannah
who could not find it in her conscience to ask questions
of this child and waited for her next words. ‘And, of
course,’ she said reflectively, ‘you did look specially nice
at the party, almost pretty, Moley, when you were talking
to Mr. Blenkinsop.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What next?’ Hannah asked disdainfully. ‘And I
don’t see much use in a face that’s only almost pretty.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But it’s so exciting. You don’t know what’s going to
happen to it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well,’ said Hannah, ‘I never thought I should die
conceited about my looks and, if they’ve pleased Mr.
Pilgrim, I shall also die contented.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t know about pleasing him. At first I thought
it was that and so did Ethel, and she stopped giggling,
but afterwards, when he’d gone, I found out that he’d
been more interested in your cousin. I was rather in a
muddle about it all, and I told Ethel you had a cousin
Hilda when she asked me, and then I rather wished I
hadn’t, in case there might be something about her you
wouldn’t want people to know. I suppose I ought to
have stayed with them all the time.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ought?’ Hannah said quickly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, and then I should have known why Ethel was so
funny when you came in. It wasn’t only kissing Wilfrid,
Moley. I didn’t like that myself.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’re rather a goose, aren’t you? And look here,
I don’t employ private detectives, and my cousin Hilda
is quite a match for Mr. Pilgrim, so please mind your own
business in future.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It is my business,’ Ruth said stubbornly. ‘If people
talk about you and your relations, I shall tell you what
they say. Besides, I’m interested. What does Ethel want
to tell Father? But you’ll find out. She won’t want to
tell you, but she can’t help it. And why did she begin
altering her new hat?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘She’s always altering things. It’s the reforming spirit.
And I’m going to alter mine, the newest I’ve got, and that’s
three years old. I shall be out all day on Sunday.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘How perfectly beastly! But you’re not going into the
country, are you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes I am. I can’t take you. I’m sorry. Some day
we’ll go together.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s always some day with you,’ Ruth complained.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ Hannah said, ‘it always has been and I suppose
it always will be.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’re not unhappy, are you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I should be happier if I could take you with me.
In another month or two, perhaps we’ll go across the
river and find primroses and violets.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘In the Easter holidays?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If we can,’ Hannah said, wondering where she would
be by that time.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘We can if you really want to.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Want to!’ Hannah cried. ‘I’d like to spend the rest
of my life doing nothing else.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’d soon get tired of that,’ Ruth said wisely.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXXIV</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah studied the sky carefully on Saturday night. It
promised well for the next day, and when she had finished
with the stars she lowered her gaze to the housetops and
tried to decide from which of the chimneys in Prince’s
Road the smoke of Mr. Blenkinsop’s excellent coal fire was
rising. She thought there would have been more sense
in an arrangement which allowed her to look after the
baby while Mr. Blenkinsop took Mrs. Ridding into the
country, but, fond as Hannah was of babies, she rejoiced
in Mr. Blenkinsop’s caution. A day spent in Mrs. Ridding’s
basement, or in pushing the baby about the streets of
Upper Radstowe, could hardly be favourably compared
with the plan he had made, and no one but a woman with
Hannah’s experience of living in other people’s houses
and of being perpetually on duty, could understand the
rapture with which she looked forward to the morrow.
If she had a wish it was that she might have gone alone
into some place free of associations, where she could have
walked whither she liked, and as fast or as slowly, thinking
her own thoughts until, in wide spaces, she lost all
pressing sense of her personality. But things were very
well as they were, and in this mood she started the next
morning, before the family had gone to chapel, leaving a
Ruth who tried not to look neglected and a Robert
Corder who was almost paternal in his good wishes for
her undertaking.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She put away her cares. She would not think about
Mr. Pilgrim and what he had told Ethel: she would not
think about Ethel and her renewed manner of a distrustful
colt, advancing, with suspicious glances, for
favours, in such matters as altering a hat, and edging
away as though it were Hannah, and not she, who had a
tendency to bite. With such worries, Miss Mole was not
going to spoil her day: Mr. Blenkinsop was waiting for
her at the station, and the tramcar which carried her to
that grimy portal was a processional coach, and the more it
swayed, the better Hannah was pleased. She was determined
to be, she could not help being, pleased with everything.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At nine o’clock that evening, Miss Mole walked slowly
up the garden path. She did not turn and wave a hand
to Mr. Blenkinsop at the gate, yet she knew he would stand
there until he heard the front door shut behind her, and
perhaps a little longer, and through all her other memories
of the day she saw his stalwart figure, pursuing and protective;
his solemn face, anxious but chivalrously incurious.
She went through the hall and up the stairs, hardly
feeling solidity under her feet, noticing things from the
habit of observation, but indifferent to them. The drawing-room
door was open and she could see that the blinds
had not been drawn, an omission peculiarly irritating to
her, and on any other night she would have drawn them
quickly and had a sharp word for Doris: to-night she
passed on. She knew Mr. Corder would be waiting for
his tea and the knowledge flicked her mind and left no
impression, and it was only when she came to Ruth’s
door, which was ajar, and heard Ruth’s voice, that she
halted in a march which seemed to have been going on
for ever, through lanes, and fields, and woods and the
streets of Radstowe.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, come in, Moley,’ Ruth said. ‘I’ve been waiting
for you. Light the night-light. I thought you said you
would be in to supper, and we’ve had such an awful day!
Have you seen Ethel?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I haven’t seen anybody,’ Hannah said in a colourless
voice. She stood at the end of Ruth’s bed, gradually
distinguishing the face from the pillow and the dark
eyes from the face, and slowly, finger by finger, she drew
off her gloves, making that business last as long as possible.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I was afraid she would come upstairs before you did
and begin banging,’ Ruth sighed. ‘I very nearly got
into your bed. Why don’t you light the light? I’d do
it, but you always do, and I like you to.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘In a minute,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I can’t see you and you don’t sound as if you’re here
at all. You sound as if you’re where you’ve come from.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, no, no,’ Hannah said faintly. And now Ruth sat
up and asked anxiously, ‘Have you had an awful day,
too?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah swept her face with her hands, trying to brush
away its weariness and the stiffness of its control. A
certain amount of mental warmth invaded her cold
brain, telling her that here was Ruth, who had had an
awful day, and who was afraid of Ethel, and she responded
to the suggestion that she was needed. ‘Where are the
matches?’ she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, that’s right, that’s right,’ Ruth said, as the little
flame budded and then flowered. ‘That’s better. Standing
there in the dark, all frosty, as if you’d come sailing
through the air and hadn’t any breath left—it gave me a
funny feeling. You’re not unhappy, are you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Tired,’ Hannah said. ‘I’ve walked for miles and miles.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And was the little house all right?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t know. I didn’t go inside.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I thought that was what you went for.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘So it was, but I had a good long walk instead.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then I wish you’d come home earlier, if that was all
you were doing. You managed Father about Howard,’
and at these unexpected words, Hannah’s brain became
normally active, ‘and you might have managed him about
Ethel. But it would have been better if you hadn’t gone
at all.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No doubt,’ Hannah said sourly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘For you, I mean. Because Father thinks you didn’t go
to see your little house, and you haven’t seen it properly,
have you? But still, if you meant to—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah heard this careful balancing of her deeds and
intentions, this calculation of consequences, with a
surprise which changed to indignation that Ruth should
have them to make and then should offer them to her,
and she said sharply. ‘Don’t talk like that! You can tell
me about Ethel, if you like.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was seldom that Miss Mole spoke severely and there
was always humour in her acidity, but there was none
to-night and Ruth was silent for a few moments before
she said, ‘I do hate people to talk after chapel, across the
pews. I believe that’s what they go for.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah did not know a depth of misery from which
she could not rise for the discussion of human impulses
and motives. ‘No,’ she said, ‘it’s the psychological
what-d’you-call-it of the varnish. Something adhesive
about it, I suppose. And then, with the bright blue
firmament overhead, you must expect geniality.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I wish I could go to a beautiful church where nobody
speaks until they get outside, and then not much. I can’t
bear the way they ask each other to tea, and talk about
who’s got influenza, and what the doctor said. They
look so holy before the service, and, as soon as it’s over,
they’re just like Jack-in-the-boxes, nodding their heads
and being so pleasant to each other.’ Ruth paused.
‘So pleasant, but not really nice,’ she said slowly. ‘And
that’s how Ethel got into trouble.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah sat on the end of the bed, looking at the floor,
and through the vision Ruth had conjured up of yellow
pews and the matrons of the congregation in their Sunday
best of amiability and garments, with roast beef and batter
pudding waiting for them at home, she saw herself in a
lane sunk between high banks topped by trees, and heard
the whistle of a robin. If she had been standing on higher
ground, if the robin had not whistled with that sweet
detachment, she might not have run away, but she had
felt that she was in a pit of her own making, and the
robin gaily mocked her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’re not listening, are you?’ Ruth asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah raised her head. ‘Yes. Ethel. Trouble. Who
made it?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Barley sugar Patsy. And Mrs. Spenser-Smith made
some more, but you won’t let me tell you about that.
And it was partly Mr. Pilgrim’s fault, too, because somebody
must have told Patsy that Ethel went to his chapel
on Christmas Day, and I should think he’s the kind of man
who would. And she let it out to Father, on purpose,
when they were talking after the service, just so that Mrs.
Spenser-Smith shouldn’t think she knows more about us
than Patsy does. And then Mrs. Spenser-Smith had to
let Patsy know that she knew something that Patsy didn’t,
but they both talked to Father and pretended they weren’t
talking to each other.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It sounds complicated.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It was worse when we got home. Father and Ethel
had a quarrel and she’s been to Mr. Pilgrim’s chapel to-night
and says she’ll go as often as she likes, and I don’t
know whether she’s come back yet. So that’s the kind of
day we’ve had. Do you think,’ Ruth asked wistfully, ‘you
could finish it up a bit better? It was so wonderful about
Howard, but that’s always the way. The horrid things
happen all of a sudden, and we were so peaceful, weren’t
we?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>It seemed to Hannah that all her work was undone.
Here was Ruth, as nervous and unhappy as she had been
three months ago, Ethel had bolted from her stable in
search of Mr. Pilgrim, and Lilla’s spite, too great for her
caution, had shaken Robert Corder’s growing trust of his
housekeeper in some way yet to be discovered. And Mr.
Blenkinsop had had a fruitless errand and never again
would he come to Miss Mole for help, or give it to her
in asking for it. She had seen him for the last time,
perhaps. He had been good and kind, but he must have
despised her and compared her unfavourably with Mrs.
Ridding who was self-controlled. And how was he
explaining her behaviour? He had asked no questions,
but they must be knocking at his brain and he would
have to answer them. She was indifferent about his
answers, for who was he to criticise? It was a sense of
loss that oppressed her when she went down the stairs
to do what she could for Ruth. She had lost Mr. Blenkinsop,
she had lost the remnants of her romance and some
of her self-esteem, and she did not know what else she
was going to lose when she encountered Mr. Corder.
She had, too, a sense of shame from which she had been
running all day and she must turn and face it when she
was alone, stare it out of countenance, until it dwindled
and then vanished. This she had not been able to do
while Mr. Blenkinsop was near. His pained solemnity
and mute desire to help had confused her mind, for he
was connected with the shame, his presence had increased
it, and she longed for the solitude of her bedroom,
a hiding place for her wounds, towards which she had
been making when the habit of thinking about Ruth had
stopped her. And Ruth’s need had come at a fortunate
moment: she realised that, in spite of her misery, and up
sprang her resilient hopefulness. The disasters of this
day might have their value—all things had their value
if they were properly used—and who could handle them
better than Hannah Mole? And whatever Robert Corder’s
cause of complaint might be, she was ready to do battle
with him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘We have had a very unfortunate day,’ he said sternly
when she entered. ‘I found the fire out when I came back
from evening service.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah, that’s why I never go to it,’ Hannah said, and she
said it with more roguishness than was quite suitable.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I have reason to know that some people find superior
attractions elsewhere,’ he said loftily, ‘and naturally,
I must be the last to blame them, but when one of them
is my own daughter .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. By the way,’ he said, and she
approved the carelessness of his manner, ‘I hope your
business was done satisfactorily.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>With her head calculatingly on one side, Hannah looked
at him. She was not going to be trapped, and she saw
safety in the truth which, for her, had been accidental
and dreadful, but was already proving useful. ‘Well,
no, it wasn’t,’ she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But you saw your house?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, I saw it. But then a robin sang—’ There was a
delicious pain in speaking of the robin and already the
power of that memory was lessened. ‘He sang, and I
didn’t go any further, not in that direction, but we went
a long way in another.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘We? You were not alone?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh no! I was with Mr. Blenkinsop.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If it was only a walk with Mr. Blenkinsop, I think it
was a pity you chose a Sunday. And I wish you had told
me before,’ he said in a lower tone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘How could I know you would be interested?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t like to be informed about my domestic affairs
by outsiders.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then you knew?’ Hannah asked innocently, and she
decided that if he could thus deceive her, she was justified,
if she needed justification, in deceiving him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, I—well, I had a suspicion.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then it was lucky that I told the truth!’ She laughed
and seemed to expect him to laugh with her. ‘And why
shouldn’t I? But will you tell me who forestalled me?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It was Mrs. Spenser-Smith.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘How on earth—Oh yes, I told her myself.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But she gave me to understand that Mr. Blenkinsop
was taking you to some other place of worship.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Only to Nature’s cathedral, as they call it. That’s a
painful expression, isn’t it?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Is it?’ Mr. Corder replied vaguely, and she thought
he was wondering how often he had used it, but he put
that aside. ‘And it hurt me, Miss Mole.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It would,’ she said sympathetically.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Coming, as it did, after more troubling news of the
same kind.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And perhaps there’s just as good an explanation.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m afraid not. I’m afraid there is no doubt that my
daughter had been attending Mr. Pilgrim’s chapel, not
regularly, but noticeably. How can I explain a desertion
like that? And it’s not—it’s not modest, Miss Mole.
She won’t listen to reason. She defied me this afternoon.’
He shaded his eyes with his hand. ‘This is worse than
Howard,’ he said in a muffled voice and she thought that
in this reference to his son, the man himself was speaking,
and past his shoulder, on the desk, she saw Mrs. Corder
listening.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She took a breath and said, ‘You must ask him to the
house.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But why? I dislike the man. He is not a man with
whom I have, or could have, any sympathy. Ignorant—and
rather absurd. And if you are suggesting that I
should do it for Ethel’s sake, I must refuse. I don’t
wish her to be friendly with him.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘The more she sees him, the less she may like him, and
stolen fruits are sweet—so they say. It isn’t everybody’s
experience.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And I have never encouraged young men to come to
the house.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘If you had, she might not have been interested in
Mr. Pilgrim, and he’s middle-aged, but I think a middle-aged
man would suit her.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m disappointed, Miss Mole. I was hoping for your
support, but it seems as though no woman can see a man
who is not married without prejudice in his favour.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah controlled a smile and gave what was almost
a sniff. ‘I don’t call Mr. Pilgrim a savoury object myself,
but that’s neither here nor there. Make a bargain with
her. She doesn’t go to his chapel, but he comes here if
he wants to. If she’s going to tire of him, she’ll tire the
quicker; if not, what can you do? No, she must not go to
his chapel. It’s a fierce light that beats on those thrones
of yours.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Could you—’ he hesitated, ‘would you speak to her
yourself? She won’t listen to me. I used some strong
expressions about Mr. Pilgrim.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ll keep mine to myself. <span class='it'>Suaviter in modo.</span> I’ll do
my best.’ She looked at Mrs. Corder and hoped she was
feeling grateful. ‘And, Mr. Corder, it’s a pity for Ruth
to hear about things like this.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s a pity for the things to occur. And—er—Miss
Mole, you’ll forgive me, but I think you will agree I
ought to know—is there any—any attachment between
you and Mr. Blenkinsop?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah cast down her eyes and her lips twitched, but,
suddenly she wanted to cry. She had lost Mr. Blenkinsop:
the only use he had for her was gone, and the one she
had for him, which was no more than the sense of a strange
kind of fellowship, was growing greater as Mr. Pilgrim
approached. She had meant to equivocate and tease Mr.
Corder with the prospect of another amorous situation,
even to raise her value in his opinion, and she found she
could not do it. She looked up and she was afraid there
were tears in her eyes. ‘No, none,’ she said firmly.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXXV</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah went into the cold, dreary dining-room. Long
ago, she had removed the dejected fern from the middle
of the table and Uncle Jim had improved the behaviour
of the gas, but now the fire was nearly out and nothing
could change the aspect of a room which had not a single
article of beauty in it, except the chrysanthemums in a
shallow bowl of Hannah’s purchasing. She put her face
against the flowers and drew in their bitter scent before
she took off her hat and coat and knelt down to stir the
fire, and she cast a grim look at the hat as it lay, upside
down, on the chair. She was glad she had not bought
a new one for her happy day in the country, yet there
would have been an excellent irony in spending her
savings on adornment for the occasion, and, from the
artistic point of view, that would have been the finishing
touch, the master stroke, to this comic tragedy, for
undoubtedly, there had been something comic about it,
and that, perhaps, was what made it harder to bear.
There would have been consolation in seeing herself as
a purely tragic figure and that relief had been denied her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Nothing had been further from her thoughts than
tragedy when she reached Radstowe station. The sun
was shining. Mr. Blenkinsop was watching for her from
the entrance, the tickets in his pocket. He had secured
seats in the waiting train, and Hannah sat in the corner
of a first class carriage with her feet on a foot-warmer that
was really hot, too hot for the welfare of her shoes, which
she was willing to jeopardise rather than disregard Mr.
Blenkinsop’s efforts for her comfort. Mr. Blenkinsop
sat opposite to her and he wore the kind of country suit
she did not imagine he possessed, and she had a passing
regret for her own shabbiness and then forgot it. She
was too busy looking out of the window to think about
herself, and when she looked at Mr. Blenkinsop it was
only for response to her pleasure and the knowing remarks
she made about the fields, what was to be sown, or had
been sown in them, and how the ploughing had been
done.</p>

<p class='pindent'>When she remembered the journey, and it was a slow
one, giving her plenty of time to look at the winter landscape,
more exquisitely coloured than a summer one,
she thought Mr. Blenkinsop had treated her as though she
were a child; he answered intelligently, but seemed preoccupied,
as grown-ups will be, but once he broke a
silence by announcing that the house they were going to
see was not to be sold, but to be let.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘So much the better,’ Hannah said. ‘A house can be a
millstone round your neck. But I think you’ll find the
train service inconvenient.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘So much the better,’ he echoed with a smile that
vexed her in its complaisance, and the child he was taking
into the country became the alert Miss Mole, who asked
if he intended to resign his work at the bank.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At this, Mr. Blenkinsop had the grace to look a little
embarrassed. ‘I’m thinking about it,’ he confessed.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ah, she thought, things were easy for people with an
income they had not to earn; they could take risks; they
need not be afraid of being found out; yet she had compensations;
no day, for instance, could ever be for Mr.
Blenkinsop, with his inheritance from his mother and as
many holidays as he liked, what this day was for her, and
he, who was potentially free, could not get the full flavour
out of a brief and lovely pause in a perpetual state of
dependence on the whims and prejudices of other people.
The sense of space, the fields, rippling gently into a
distance where they lost their colour in the pale blue of
hills so dimly outlined that they might have been clouds,
were giving Hannah a liberty of spirit which made her
material bondage unimportant, and she did not envy
Mr. Blenkinsop; indeed, she felt a sort of pity for him.
His material bonds might be nothing, but what spiritual
ones was he forging for himself? She looked at him, trying
to keep that question from shaping itself into words, and
he smiled at her, rather shyly, as though he knew what
was in her mind and wished to reassure her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was at the junction, when they changed to a still
slower train, that Hannah began to be uneasy for herself,
and now there was another question she dared not ask
him. This train looked old enough to be the very one in
which she had journeyed to Radstowe for those wonderful
days with her parents, the very train which had taken
her part of the way to school and back again, and every
field they passed, every spinney and farmhouse was
familiar.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She said, a little breathlessly, ‘But this is my own part
of the country!’ And she was not surprised, she was
resigned to the ruin of her day, when, at her own station,
Mr. Blenkinsop told her that it was here they must get
out. She stood apart while he asked directions of the
porter, so fearful was she of hearing the impossible words
she dreaded, and then, defying her premonition of evil,
she took the broad road to the right, instead of the one
that led towards home.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, it’s this way,’ Mr. Blenkinsop said, pointing with
his stick, and he set off at a good pace.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not so fast,’ Hannah begged. Her mind was like a
map in which she saw every house and cottage in the
district reached by this road. ‘How many miles?’ she
asked.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘About two.’ She stood still and Mr. Blenkinsop
anxiously enquired if that was too much for her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, no.’ There was still a little hope and a good deal
of courage in her heart. ‘Tell me about the house,’ she
said, as they walked on.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Blenkinsop had not applied to any agencies for the
cottage he wanted. He had heard of this one in a roundabout
fashion which ended in a customer at the bank,
and back again, through this customer, he had made his
appointment with the owner, a procedure which suited
his own desire for secrecy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And I think those must be the chimneys,’ he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was then that Hannah stopped dead. She had a
physical feeling of sickness, a horrible, shrivelling feeling
in her breast, as though her heart, with all its generosity
and courage, had been squeezed in a hard hand to the size
of a pea and, for a moment, she felt murderous at this outrage.
Then shame swooped over her like a great flapping,
threatening bird, and the robin piped his gay derisive
note.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the sunk lane, in sight of her own chimneys, she
looked about her for escape. She could not face the man
to whom she had given everything she had, she would
not look at him and see the full folly of her surrender and
her treasure broken at his poor feet of clay. The black
bird hovered, the robin piped, and she knew she had been
befooling herself for years, making excuses for him,
clinging to every memory that had beauty in it, and now
the fingers, which had so quickly grown flaccid in hers,
were insolently snapped in her face. This was the man
she had loved! Her shame lay in his character and her
misreading of it, not in the physical intimacy which,
though it was misery to remember it, was comparatively
unimportant, and no power could have dragged her,
accompanied by Mr. Blenkinsop, into his presence.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I can’t go,’ she had said. ‘I can’t go. You must go
alone,’ and she had scrambled up the steep, earthy bank
into a little wood, and there, as she heard the breeze very
softly singing in the pine trees and felt their needles
under her feet, she knew that the black bird had not
followed her and she felt no shame, only a purely human
grief that anyone could have hurt her so cruelly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>At this point in her memories, Hannah stopped and
dropped her face into her hands. The rest was a confusion
of woods and fields and lanes, with Mr. Blenkinsop
at her side and the bird shadowing them again. She did
not know where she had gone, or what she had said, or
whether she had been silent. Kind Mr. Blenkinsop, had
he but known it, was retarding her recovery from shock.
She longed to be free of him. Alone, she could have
steadied herself and concocted more of her excuses,
striving to find something not altogether dishonourable
in this sorry business, but Mr. Blenkinsop persisted, and
a funny pair they must have made—a distraught woman
pursued by a solemn gentleman who vainly hoped for a
clue to this mystery, and the longer she left her behaviour
unexplained, and she might so easily have invented
something, the more impossible explanation became,
but, in truth, she hardly thought of him, except as someone
she did not want, and someone who subtly made the
conduct of the other more abominable.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She realised, and she grew hot, that he had treated her
as the mental case she actually was, and, but that he had
made her eat and drink, he had let her have her way
which was that of physical exhaustion, until at last he had
found a station and a train, and back they had jogged, in
a darkness that hid the beauties she had rejoiced in earlier
in the day.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Her weariness and her poverty in friendship assailed
her now. For the first time in her career she had behaved
like a baby, and she was denied the luxury of having someone
who would bear with her in that state and think no
worse of her, and that, at the moment, was the greatest
luxury she could think of. There was Mr. Samson and
there was Wilfrid who both, in their different ways,
would have offered sympathy and comfort, but Mr.
Samson was not sensitive to human emotions and Wilfrid
was too young to be made a confidant. On the shoulder
of neither of these two could she lay her weary head.
There was no one to look to beyond herself, and after all,
this despondency would pass. She had had enough
experience of unhappiness to know that it need not be
permanent if she willed otherwise, and she willed it now
with all her might. She told herself it was a good thing
she had finished with the remains of her sentiment about
her cottage and its occupant, and if she had lost her first
motive for frustrating Mr. Pilgrim, she had found another
in the simple necessity of earning her bread, yet, like a
fool, she was encouraging Mr. Corder to have him to the
house! That was the fault of Mrs. Corder who could
hear every word spoken in the study and could do nothing
more. It would be cowardly and cruel not to help her,
moreover Hannah knew that what was not worth risking
was not worth keeping, and while she was prepared to
risk, she was also prepared to fight.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She sat there, waiting for Ethel to return, but it was
Wilfrid who came in first, and, at once, she said, ‘You
did well to give me that brooch and remind me that
Cupid is blind.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>He hesitated for a moment and if, like everybody else,
he knew of her excursion with Mr. Blenkinsop, he made
no reference to it. ‘In wounding Ethel?’ he asked. ‘Is this
Pilgrim fellow as bad as that? We had the hell of a Sunday
dinner, Mona Lisa. What did you want to go out for?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You may well ask that! But all things work together
for good.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘To those who love God. I’ve always told you God’s
the uncle and no one loves him at present, so there’s not
much hope. Why couldn’t he take Ethel into the study
and give her a wigging, instead of poisoning the food?
But he wouldn’t have enjoyed it so much without an
audience. I did my best. I tried to look bored, but he
went on and on. Streams of indignant eloquence! I
wonder he had any breath left for the evening service.
I found I had an engagement for tea and supper, and I
think I’ll change my lodgings. My poor dear mother
doesn’t pay three guineas a week to have her son’s nerves
shattered. I want a nice, comfortable landlady and peace
in which to pursue my studies.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’d better try Mrs. Gibson. She may have some
rooms to let before long.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But then, I don’t want to leave you, Mona Lisa. You
are the extenuating circumstance.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t extenuate indefinitely.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah, you’re wanting to change your lodgings too!
Now, if you’d start a boarding house of your own—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ve thought of that but I’ve no money and I’ve been
told I’m too young. That surprises you, doesn’t it? But
it shows you what some people think about me! And
now they’d add that I haven’t enough sense! No, I can’t
bother with a boarding house. All I want is a little hole
to crawl into—a nice dry cave, but people aren’t allowed
to live in caves nowadays, are they? Everything always
belongs to someone else. When I leave my present
situation, I’m going to be a charwoman. A home of my
own, if it’s only an attic, and no questions asked so long
as I can scrub. I ought to have done it years ago, but I
suppose I had some ridiculous notions about gentility.
You’d better go to bed. I’m waiting up for Ethel and it
will be no help to me if she finds you here!’</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXXVI</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Sitting by the fire and waiting for Ethel’s arrival, Hannah
was almost annoyed to find that the acute stage of her
suffering had passed before she had had an opportunity
to lie on her bed and cry until she could cry no longer.
That was what she had meant to do, but first Ruth and
then Robert Corder had made demands on her and the
contact with their minds and Wilfrid’s, had diverted her
thoughts into several channels and the strength had gone
from the main one. ‘And a good thing, too!’ Hannah said
to herself. She was able to analyse the emotions she had
no need to control and did not wish to express in an
extravagance of weeping, and she could wonder how much
the presence of Mr. Blenkinsop had contributed to her
pain and whether, meeting the circumstances alone, she
could have dealt with them more sanely, with her usual
acceptance of human frailty. She ought to have gone
on and got what humour she could out of a situation in
which her lover offered her house to Mr. Blenkinsop,
but she was not callous enough for that, nor cruel enough
to put the offerer to such confusion. And his shame would
have been hers; the worse he proved himself, the greater
was her folly and, at once, she began to find excuses for
him. Perhaps he wanted to let the house for her sake and
intended to send her the money; perhaps his conscience
had begun to prick him after ten years of somnolence,
but even to Hannah’s eagerness, these explanations were
unsatisfactory, and she knew it was more likely that he
was weary of the place and wanted to get rid of it, and saw
no difference between living there for nothing and taking
the proceeds of someone else’s tenancy. There was the
chance, and Hannah unwisely clung to it, that Mr.
Blenkinsop’s information, received in such a roundabout
fashion, had been distorted in transit, but all these
speculations were useless. Though she had cured Mr.
Blenkinsop of wishing to see her again, though she had
given him food for curious thought, she was not otherwise
much worse off than she had been before, and she would
be actually better off if she could be ruthless with her
memories and face the fact that the man she had loved,
with a recklessness due to a hero who had risked death and
been grievously wounded, had not been worth loving at
all; that he, at least, had had no romantic notions of a
life-long attachment; that he had merely seen her as a
young woman, enamoured, like many others, of a soldier,
who had offered him a home when he had none. He had
taken her as part of the house, like the furniture and the
fowls, and it was horrible to think that probably at no
stage of their intercourse had he considered her as more
than a temporary and amusing convenience. If there had
been any other sentiment, at any time, any realisation
that a woman of her character was not one for easy
alliances, or that she had imperilled her future while
she made the present secure for him, he could not have
treated her to years of silence and to this final insult.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Yet it was well that this had happened, Hannah thought.
She was bare, she was bereft, but she was no longer trying
to be blind, and she was the stronger to meet Mr. Pilgrim.
She could transform herself into cousin Hilda without
any sickening qualms of disloyalty to a memory and,
given a little time, she could put these hurts so far from
her that she would persuade herself it was really cousin
Hilda who had endured them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The expedition to her house had been an odd coincidence
and, with the imminence of Mr. Pilgrim, it would
have persuaded some people that God approved of the
laws men had made, and ratified them with cunningly
contrived punishments for offenders, but this would be
to make God responsible for Mr. Pilgrim, who had spared
a little time from his exhortations to the troops encamped
near Hannah’s cottage, for reproaching a woman for her
care of a man broken in doing what Mr. Pilgrim had no
intention of doing himself: it made God responsible for
Mr. Pilgrim’s conscience, then and now, a state of things
inconsistent with Hannah’s conception of her Deity.
No, no, men made the laws and, impatient at seeing them
broken, they devised the punishments, and their representatives,
in the persons of Mr. Pilgrim, Robert Corder
and Ethel, in Hannah’s case, would see that the penalties
were rigorously administered. And no doubt it was
God who suffered most, at the sight of His creatures
making each other miserable. Hannah was sure He was
more tenderly tolerant of her than she was herself, that
He grieved for her in having mistaken her man, but knew
her love had been largely compounded of pity, like God’s
own; that, in her act, he saw a rashness emulative of deeds
of another kind, not permitted to her sex, and, as he had
watched, presumably in some wise helplessness, the
torture of brave men, so he observed her lesser agonies,
so small compared with theirs that Hannah was ashamed
to dwell on them.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was comforting to know that God and she understood
each other, she told herself, with a cynical smile for
her presumption, and it was strange to think that Mr.
Pilgrim was probably as sure of God’s nature as she was,
and, like her, made it fit his prejudices; strange that a
God who had as many characters as the men and women
who sought Him in times of trouble and forgot Him in
their happiness, should yet have the power of giving
peace to bewildered spirits; strange, too, that the dreary
dining-room felt like a home. The resuscitated fire babbled
its cheerful inanities, Uncle Jim’s corrected gas did its
best to do as it had been told, the almost inaudible ticking
of the marble clock had a faintly friendly sound. Hannah’s
peace might only have been that of exhaustion, but she
believed it was something more and, in any case, it would
serve her turn which was to fit her to waylay Ethel before
she could rush upstairs and begin the process known to
Ruth as banging, and persuade her to accept her father’s
bargain.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the meantime, Hannah likened herself again to her
little ship, becalmed after a storm, and using the calm for
overhauling her condition, in readiness for the next
misadventure. The misadventure would come. Small
lonely ships which set out on perilous voyages, must be
prepared for worse treatment than bigger ones receive,
especially when they are hampered by bad records, but,
changing the metaphor, Hannah refused to be the dog
with a bad name who, foreseeing hanging, waits passively
for his punishment. There was work for her to do, and
though there was humour in the thought that she would
not be allowed to do it if Robert Corder knew about her
past, and that the time might yet come when he would
look back with horror at the confidences he had made
to the unscrupulous Miss Mole, she was not going to lose
her pleasure while it lasted, and she was proud of her little
triumphs, culminating, on this day which had seemed so
unrelievedly black, in Robert Corder’s asking of a favour,
and its inevitable effect of making Hannah like him rather
better.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She was thinking that she might even learn to like
Mr. Pilgrim, when a sound at the front door drove her
into the hall, and there was Ethel, with a new stubborn
look on her face. The study door opened a minute later,
but it was discreetly shut by an unseen hand, for Hannah
was asking Ethel if she had had any supper, saying she had
fasted herself since five o’clock, and proposing that they
should go into the larder and see what they could find.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This was the sort of greeting Ethel had not looked
for and, braced to meet abuse, she collapsed under
kindness to the extent of accompanying Miss Mole into
the kitchen. ‘I’ve been to Highfields Chapel,’ she said,
anxious to sustain her attitude of independence, ‘and then
I went to see Patsy Withers.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But she’s the one who’s been telling tales about you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That’s why I went.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘H’m,’ said Hannah, ‘people who tell tales seem to
have an attraction for you. And just look what they’ve
done to the joint while I was out! Mangled it! And
wasted,’ she eyed it calculatingly, ‘at least half a pound,
I should say.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It may have been wasted, but it wasn’t eaten,’ Ethel
said, and Hannah looked at her with quick appreciation,
but Ethel was not trying to be funny, she was merely
stating a fact. ‘And that reminds me,’ she went on, and
now it was she who looked at Hannah, ‘I met Mr. Blenkinsop
just now.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Why does it remind you? Oh, I suppose he made part
of the mid-day meal. Well, what was he doing?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Having a walk, he said.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I should have thought he’d walked enough.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You never told us you were going out with him.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You never told us you were going to Mr. Pilgrim’s
chapel. I don’t think we’ll have any of this reminiscent
mutton. I’ll warm some soup. And was Miss Withers
pleased to see you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘She was more pleased to see me go,’ Ethel said with
her unconscious humour. ‘Mr. Blenkinsop was walking
up and down on the other side of the road.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Dear me! I’m afraid I’ve wound him up and he can’t
run down. And did Mr. Pilgrim preach a good sermon?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ Ethel said unwillingly, ‘but that’s quite a different
thing.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t follow you,’ Hannah said politely as she stirred
the soup.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I mean, going out with Mr. Blenkinsop is quite
different from going to a service.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That was what I hoped,’ Hannah admitted.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And I don’t see why I shouldn’t go where I can get—get
what I want.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ah, don’t try too hard for it,’ Hannah said, and she
spoke dreamily because she was thinking of Mr. Blenkinsop,
walking up and down the road. Did he think she
meant to do something desperate? And would he walk
up and down all night? It seemed to her that the kindest,
the most painful, and yet the pleasantest thing she could
do was to run out and tell him all was well.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She put a bowl of steaming soup in front of Ethel.
‘Drink that,’ she said. ‘I shall be back in a minute.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Blenkinsop was turning slowly and coming towards
her when she reached the pavement, and she hurried
across the road to him.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s all right, it’s all right!’ she exclaimed, half laughing,
and putting out a hand, she said, ‘Forgive me. I’ve
spoilt your day, I’ve spoilt everything, but it was only
a temporary insanity. Now I’m in as right a mind as I
ever had.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I can’t leave it at that,’ Mr. Blenkinsop muttered,
holding her hand firmly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But it’s too late to get me certified to-night.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Can’t you be serious, just for once?’ he begged.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ve been serious for hours. That was the mistake.
One’s self is the wrong subject for seriousness, Mr.
Blenkinsop.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I’m serious for you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I was afraid so. That was why I came out. To tell
you there was no need, and to say good night.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I shan’t have a good night,’ he said testily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That will be a change, won’t it?’ she asked, and giving
his hand a parting pressure and freeing it with some
difficulty, she went back into the house.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ethel was making large eyes over the bowl of soup.
‘Wherever have you been, Miss Mole?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Turning policeman X off his beat. It’s time the poor
man had some supper, and I’m hungry, too. Didn’t Miss
Withers offer you anything to eat?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, she did, but I wouldn’t have it. Of course I
wouldn’t! What did she want to interfere for?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Why does anyone want to interfere? If we could all
live and let live, we should be happier.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ethel grew restive. ‘I know what you’re hinting at, and
nobody wants to do you any harm, Miss Mole.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘They can’t,’ Hannah said stoutly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But we have to do what’s right.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m sure Miss Withers used those very words.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But it’s so different! I’ve done nothing to be ashamed
of. It’s not wrong just because it vexes Father.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That’s true,’ Hannah said, ‘but what does Mr. Pilgrim
think about it?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘He says it helps him to have me there.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘So you’re trying to help him, and Miss Withers is
trying to help your father.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No she isn’t. She’s trying to make him think we need
somebody to look after us. She said she felt like a mother
towards us, Miss Mole, and that’s what she’d like to be.
I told her you could do everything we needed, and we
didn’t want anybody else.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That was very nice of you,’ Hannah said, ‘and one in
the eye for Patsy!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And that’s what worries me,’ Ethel said. ‘One of the
things. You’re so kind, Miss Mole, and so unselfish, but
Mr. Pilgrim says he doesn’t see how you could have a
cousin so exactly like you. And there’s Ruth to be thought
of.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ruth!’ Hannah controlled herself and waited.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘He says you and your cousin would have to be twins.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘So we are—spiritually. Poor Mr. Pilgrim! Poor Miss
Withers! How anxious some people are for the welfare
of some of the others! And I’m anxious about yours and
that’s enough to make you suspicious, I’ll admit, but I
really mean it. Listen. If Mr. Pilgrim finds you such a
help, he’ll come and look for you when he wants you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But Father doesn’t like him.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Perhaps he’ll learn to,’ Hannah said hopefully, ‘but
he won’t if you desert the chapel. It really isn’t quite
fair to him you know. Now, don’t start crying! What are
you crying for?’ she asked and she regretted the sharpness
of her voice when she heard Ethel’s answer, pathetic in
its distrust of herself and in her helpless readiness to
confess it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Because Mr. Pilgrim may not come.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, he’ll come,’ Hannah said. ‘Why, he’ll come if it’s
only to have another look at me! Has he told you why
he’s so curious about me?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, he says it isn’t fit for me to hear.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then you may be sure he’ll tell you,’ Hannah said
encouragingly.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXXVII</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>She ought to have told Mr. Blenkinsop to give up all
thoughts of the little house. It was ill-omened, it was a
place in which no happiness would be found. She ought
to have told him that, and to have asked him to think again
before he acted, to have pointed to herself and told him
that the world would be against him, and the world had
a nasty way of making its displeasure felt, but she had
been thinking of her own misery, she, whom Ethel
called unselfish, and she had not warned him of his dangers,
the disillusions which are worse when they come
to unlawful lovers, the bonds which tighten irksomely
when there is only chivalry to prevent their being unloosed.
And Mr. Blenkinsop would have replied that this was
no concern of hers, just as Hannah would have replied
to any friend who had tried to interfere with her. Mr.
Blenkinsop would much prefer being left to look after
himself; he was as old as she was, as he had taken care to
tell her, and it was odd that he should have taken her into
his confidence at all, but, for some reason or other, that
was what people did. Ruth, Ethel, Robert Corder, had
all done it and perhaps Mr. Pilgrim would find he had
to ask her how he had best deal with the duty pressing
on him in connection with herself! That would not
surprise her; nothing would surprise her after the events
of this day, and it seemed impossible that it should be
only a few hours since she had stood in the lane and seen
the chimneys of her house.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She lay in bed, and the peace she had felt in the dining-room
would not stay in a mind busy with pictures of that
house. She saw it as it was when she saved it from the
sale of everything else her father had possessed, a four-roomed
cottage washed in a pale pink which was stained
with drippings from the roof: there were overgrown,
weedy flower-beds under the windows, but the true
cottage flowers were there, and there were apple trees,
with whitened trunks, in the rough grass of the orchard.
She was a girl then, resisting the advice of her elders
against keeping a property she could not use, and she
had kept it and let it to the young farm hand who already
occupied it, and who had gone to the war and not returned.
She tried not to see it as it was when she had made it
ready for her own soldier, the flower-beds weeded, the
rooms re-papered with her own hands, the outside walls
washed anew and the stains hidden, and a blue feather
of smoke rising from the chimney, like a banner in honour
of her happiness, but, try as she would, she could not
help remembering it. She remembered how the pink of
its walls had been coarsened against the lovely pink of
the apple blossom, and how all the colours, the green of
the grass, the new green of the trees, the blossom, the
waving tassels of the larch trees beyond the house, the
red-brown plumage of the new fowls, had seemed more
brilliant, more delicate and more wonderful than any
colours she had seen before, and she remembered the
absurd, pretty things she had said to herself about them
all, and had said to no one else.</p>

<p class='pindent'>That silence was a comfort to her as she turned restlessly
in her bed. She had given him everything she had
except the tenderest and most foolish of her thoughts,
restrained from giving those by some instinct which she
had not acknowledged, and for which she now thanked
God. And again she found excuses for him. She had
never been sentimental, never shown herself sensitive;
she had been gay and practical and energetic and when the
time came for parting, she had gone off with a light
word, pretending, in her pride, that his conception of
their relationship was her own. He had not understood
that she could be hurt: that was it: he had not understood.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She pressed her fingers against her eyeballs and, as
though she had pressed a button, the pictures moved
away, leaving nothing but a blur of darkness, shot with
gold and blue and purple, and this passed, too, and there
was the orchard again, in the sun, and Mrs. Ridding was
hanging washing on a line swung between two apple
trees. Hannah saw her quite clearly, with the sunshine
on her fair head, her arms raised, a clothes peg in her
mouth, and the baby crawling in the grass, clumsily and
carefully fingering the daisies and pulling them off at
their heads, and Hannah cried ‘No, no!’ in a voice that
startled the narrow quietness of her bedroom. They
should not have her cottage. It would be ill for them and,
somehow, ill for Hannah. They must go somewhere
else, yet, when she pictured them elsewhere, she had the
same sinking of the heart.</p>

<p class='pindent'>What did this mean? she asked, starting up in bed.
Propped against her pillows, she stared for a long time
at the oblong of her window, with nothing but air and
trees and hills between it and the lane where she had
stood that day, and when she lay down she did it stealthily,
as though any noise, any quick movement, would rouse
into activity, into reality, a suspicion of herself which
must be allowed to die. Surely she had enough to bear
without this new, absurd, hopeless pain, but this was one
which it was in her power to stop, and she would stop it.
She lay, rigid under this determination, and suddenly,
unawares, she began to laugh, quietly, with her mouth
against the bedclothes. Mr. Blenkinsop had always made
her laugh and she would laugh now, if she never did it
again. It was queer to love a man because he made you
laugh without intention, or was the laughter born of
love and the love of a conviction that you could trust him
to the end of time? She did not know, but her laughter
ceased, and the suspicion had become reality, and it no
longer hurt her.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It is more blessed to give than to receive,’ she said
aloud, and she raised dubious eyebrows above her closed
eyelids and turned down the corners of her mouth, for
she had made previous trial of giving and not receiving.
‘But it depends on the person you give to,’ she said, and
with surprising quickness, with more surprising happiness,
she went to sleep.</p>

<p class='pindent'>But a happiness that comes at night, when all things,
both good and evil, are possible, is harder to sustain on
a cold winter morning, and though Hannah woke to the
knowledge that some beneficence had lulled her to sleep
and given her dreams of a vague felicity, she rose in a
stern state of mind and, as she twisted up her hair before
the mirror, she looked disdainfully at a face which was
sadly yellow in the gas light. That look expressed her
opinion of herself and her realisation of how she appeared
to other people and, during the next few days, she went
about her work in a passionate earnestness, quite different
from the leisurely manner in which Miss Mole usually
fulfilled her dudes, a manner which shirked nothing, but
was not designed to impress the rest of the household
with her superior energy and ability. Now, she washed
and ironed curtains, dusted books, turned out cupboards
which had been comfortably neglected for months,
overlooked the linen, got out the sewing machine which
was an instrument she detested, and made the dining-room
uninhabitable while she tore sheets asunder,
turned the edges to the middle and rapidly machined
them together.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Perched in her chair, out of reach of these white billows,
Ruth watched this activity disapprovingly. ‘I don’t like
this at all,’ she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And do you think I do? If there’s anything I loathe
it’s making this nasty little needle hop along the hems.
It’s like a one-legged man running a race. I hate to make
him go so fast, yet I can’t bear to let him go slowly, and
I know the cotton in the spindle will give out before
I get to the end, and I detest the noise, and I hope you’ll
all be very uncomfortable when you’re lying on these
seams. I’m not taking any particular care to get them
flat.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, I suppose it won’t last.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, nothing lasts. That’s why I’m doing it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You mean—to save the sheets from wearing out?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah stopped her turning of the handle and let the
one-legged man have a few moments rest. ‘Exactly,’ she
said. It had been on the tip of her tongue to say that in
saving the sheets from wearing out, she was trying to
wear out her emotions, but that was not an answer for
Ruth, and she knew Ruth’s questions often had more
purpose than a desire for direct information. Nevertheless,
she supplied the information. ‘When sheets get
thin in the middle, the careful housewife turns the middles
to the sides. Unsightly, sometimes uncomfortable, but
economical.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But the cupboards were not getting thin in the middle,
or the books.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Most of the books were thin all through,’ Hannah said
with a chuckle. ‘I had a good look at them. Dusting
books is one of the lesser evils, and cooking’s another.
You can pause for refreshment on the way.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And it seems to me,’ Ruth went on, ‘that you’re either
worried about something, or—’ her voice changed its
note, ‘you’re putting everything in order, in a hurry.
Rather like making a will and paying your debts when
you think you’re going to die. It isn’t that, is it?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ll tell you what it is,’ Hannah said with a great effect
of frankness. ‘I’m bad tempered.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh! Not worried? Not worried about Ethel?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ethel? Why?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’ve been so busy, I suppose you haven’t noticed,
but she’s been very pleasant for the last few days. And
after that row with Father! I expected she’d be awful.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It must have done her good,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’d rather she wasn’t quite so nice, though, and I wish
you wouldn’t be so busy about things that don’t really
matter. You see, I’m afraid you’ll miss something
important.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, if I do, you won’t. Don’t be so fussy. I’ll tell
you what we’ll do to-morrow. We’ll have our walk.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But the spring isn’t here.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then I’ll have it alone.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No. I didn’t mean that, but it’s rather like the cupboards
and the books, isn’t it?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t see the resemblance,’ Hannah said, turning
the handle of the sewing machine again, but Ruth had
found the right reason for Hannah’s suggestion. They
must have their walk while they could and if they were
together when spring came, well, then they could have
another.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Ethel was amiably ready to look after Doris and the
house. Not a single gleam of her eyes betrayed any
jealousy that Miss Mole and Ruth were going off together
with sandwiches in their pockets and no expectation of
returning before dark; she showed no further anxiety for
the moral welfare of her young sister, and Hannah and
Ruth both silently came to the conclusion that their
absence suited her. This was unfair to Ethel who had
her own consolations and who was doing her best to be
pleasant to Miss Mole, preferring her, in the capacity of
housekeeper in spite of her dark past, to the possibility
of Miss Patsy Withers as a stepmother, and Ethel knew
no more than they did that this was the day Mr. Pilgrim
had chosen for ingratiating himself with her father,
obeying the instinct which recommends a piece of
scandal shared for the sound knitting of a bond.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Unconscious of this danger in the rear, Ruth and
Hannah started, and if the trees had been in bud they could
have fancied it was April. There was a lovely mildness in
the air and it was a day on which something delightful
ought to happen as, indeed, it did, for instead of going
through Albert Square and reaching the bridge by way
of The Green, Hannah dived into a narrow, twisting lane,
with mysteriously untidy gardens on one side of it and the
backs of houses on the other, and, twisting and turning
in their descent, they came into a square where dirty
children played on the steps of Georgian houses, and when
they had passed through this and a narrow street, they
were on the road running parallel with the docks. These
were places which Ruth, living all her life in Upper
Radstowe, had not seen before, nor had she crossed the
docks by the footbridges Hannah knew, some of them,
to an adventurous imagination, hardly wider than a
plank, with a hand-rail on one side only.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Bad places on a dark night,’ Hannah said solemnly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And very exciting now,’ Ruth replied appreciatively.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It took them some time to get across the docks and
stand in another county, for everywhere there were ships;
big ones moored alongside warehouses and loading or
unloading; sailing ships piloted by tugs and looking,
Hannah said, like sad widows in their pathetic dignity
under their bare masts and yards, and the tugs were like
the undertakers, in a fuss about the funeral. There were
dredgers with endless chains of buckets, picking up
the river mud, and there were rowing boats and men
shouting and locks being opened and shut. The sky was
blue and bluer when the gulls struck across it and on the
right, high up, the suspension bridge was like a thread,
and the carts crossing it were the toys of midgets.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘We might stay all day,’ Ruth said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘We might, but we’re not going to. We’ve got to have
our walk.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, don’t say it like that, as though it’s the only
chance!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘For the benefit of our health,’ Hannah said. ‘Why
didn’t you wait and let me finish my sentence?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>They had their walk, up a long winding hill until they
reached the level of the bridge, along a pleasant road
bordered with the woods that sloped down to the river,
across fields and through copses, to the Monks’ Pool
where the red trunks of firs were mirrored in the water.
There, rather late in the day, they ate their lunch, and dusk
seemed to be deepening round them though the sky was
a pale blue circle like a reflection of the pool, and the
tops of the trees which circled the water made a fringe
for the patch of sky, and when they had thrown their
crumbs for the age-old carp which were said to live in
that water, they walked home slowly, saying very little,
happy in each other’s company, and passed over the
spangled bridge and saw the docks, spangled too, far
below them on one side and the dark river on the other.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s been a lovely day,’ Ruth said, on a deep breath,
when they stood outside the door in Beresford Road,
but when they entered the dining-room and saw Ethel
sitting by the fire, they knew it had not been a lovely day
for her.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXXVIII</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>It was fortunate for Hannah that Robert Corder heard
her story from Mr. Pilgrim. From another, he might
have listened to it receptively, but from Mr. Pilgrim
whom he disliked, who had spoilt Mrs. Spenser-Smith’s
party for him, who had lured Ethel to his chapel and who
was creating trouble of the kind Robert Corder dreaded
most and felt, in some obscure way, to be indecent, he
heard it with studied incredulity. He was not the man
to let Mr. Pilgrim think he could supply information of
any kind to the leading Nonconformist minister in Radstowe,
and he would have seen this approach as an insult
to his household and his own acumen if his vanity had
not assured him that Mr. Pilgrim had worldly, as well as
sentimental, reasons for performing what he called an
unpleasant duty, though it was one which might be the
means of putting him on familiar terms with Ethel’s
father. Robert Corder was not, and never had been,
quite comfortable about Miss Mole and, while he listened
and showed Mr. Pilgrim a forbidding face, he remembered
all his suspicions and irritations, forgotten lately in his
reliance on her, but his chief impulse, at the moment,
was to be as different from Mr. Pilgrim as he could, and
he read him a little lecture on tolerance, generosity,
tenderness towards women and the duty of Christians to
accept sinners who had repented, which was as good as
the best of his sermons. He did not commit himself to
a belief in Miss Mole’s innocence: he was too wily for
that, and he preferred to present himself as a man who was
ready to fit his practice to his theory, but if Mr. Pilgrim
had had a tail, it would have been between his legs
when he left the house, and that was why Ethel wept
alone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, what’s the matter now?’ Ruth exclaimed. ‘It’s
always the same. We can’t have anything nice, in this
family, without having something nasty afterwards.
Is it because Moley and I have been out together?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t care what you and Miss Mole do!’ Ethel
cried. ‘I wished she’d never come here!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh—you beast!’ Ruth said with vicious slowness.
‘If she wasn’t here, I wouldn’t stay. No, I wouldn’t.
I’d ask Uncle Jim to let me live with him, and I know
he would. But you’ll stay, won’t you, Moley? Don’t
listen to her. She doesn’t mean it. She’ll be sorry, soon,
but she hasn’t any self-control.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Be quiet!’ Hannah said sharply. ‘Why, in the name of
goodness, can’t you be kinder to each other? I tell you
this—and I hope you’ll remember it—I believe unkindness
is the worst sin of all. Yes,’ she said, looking at
Ethel, ‘the very worst.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m not unkind to Ruth,’ Ethel said sullenly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But you were to Moley, so I was to you. What’s she
done to you, anyhow?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘That’s not for a child like you to know,’ Ethel said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then I don’t believe you know yourself.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, I know more—’ Fearful, Ethel caught her lip on
what she was going to say, but daring, and careless, in her
wretchedness, of consequences, she let it go, and said in
a strained, weak voice, ‘I know more than Mr. Blenkinsop
does,’ and she looked at Hannah from between
shoulders raised as if to ward off a blow.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was the table Hannah struck with a single smart
rap, calling attention, if it had been necessary, to her white
face and sombre eyes, and Ruth’s murmured, questioning
repetition of Mr. Blenkinsop’s name sounded, in all their
ears, like the last effrontery. There had been dark rings
round Hannah’s eyes for days and now they showed, like
bruises, on her pallor, and Ruth and Ethel, looking at
what seemed to them the very symbol of fury and, waiting
for fierce, denunciatory tones, heard her say quietly, in
a movingly sweet and weary voice, ‘You have no manners,
either of you. What’s to become of you? You can’t go
through life biting and scratching like this.’ The sadness
went out of her voice and, in the one they were used to
she said, ‘I don’t flatter myself that mine are good, but
they ought to be, for when I was at school in—when I was
at school—I used to look at a motto on the wall and I
thought it was rather silly, but I’ve never forgotten it.
And that just shows that when you’re at school, or anywhere
else, for that matter, there are people who know
better than you do. And, in this room, I’m the one who
knows, and I’m going to tell you, as the motto told me,
that manners are not idle, but the fruit of a loyal nature
and a noble mind. Yes,’ she said emphatically, ‘a loyal
nature and a noble mind. As for you two, you remind
me of nothing so much as a pair of monkeys in a cage.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, Moley, that’s not manners!’ Ruth expostulated,
half laughing in her relief at escape from something much
worse than this, but she obeyed Hannah’s significant look
at the door, while Ethel moaned piteously, in excuse,
‘I’m so unhappy.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah checked a movement of impatience. She
knew the unhappiness of a girl could be as poignant as
that of a woman, perhaps more poignant, but the doors
were still open for the girl and she had time to wander
and find what she wanted, while, for the woman, the
doors were shut and barred and she had to find, not what
she wanted, but what she could get, inside. ‘What’s the
matter?’ she asked gently, and Ethel cried, ‘Oh, Miss
Mole, Mr. Pilgrim’s been, and Father was furious with
him—about you!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘How do you know it was about me?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Because I—I saw Mr. Pilgrim afterwards, and he told
me.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, it’s very obliging of you to pass on the news,’
Hannah said, and she went out of the room to the sound
of Ethel’s protestations that her father’s anger was not
going to affect her actions.</p>

<p class='pindent'>In the hall, Hannah rubbed her cheeks vigorously and
blinked her eyes to rid them of their stiff, glaring feeling.
Her indignant, sore anger, too bitter for relief in words,
had changed into a lively, almost gay, one, and she
knocked at the study door and showed Mr. Corder a face
which, he immediately decided, was not the right one for
his housekeeper.</p>

<p class='pindent'>He was in a noble state of scorn for Mr. Pilgrim, but
he was ready to see suspicious symptoms in Miss Mole
and the consciousness that he knew something to her
possible detriment and meant to keep that knowledge
from her, gave him a sense of power which was expressed
in the cold blandness of his manner. ‘Can I do anything
for you?’ he asked. She did not look like a guilty person
but the guilty were often shameless.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, please,’ Hannah said. ‘I want to know what Mr.
Pilgrim has been telling you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>This vexed Mr. Corder. He always shrank from a
direct attack and his feeling of power was sensibly diminished.
‘It was a confidential interview, Miss Mole.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Of which Ethel knows some of the details.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I am not responsible for that.’ He did not want to
repeat Mr. Pilgrim’s remarks. He had a fear that this
woman, who was like no other he had met, would corroborate
them, and force him to some action about which
he could consult no committee, and he took refuge on
that height from which he had addressed Mr. Pilgrim.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I think I can guarantee that he will say no more. I
consider his behaviour unmanly, Miss Mole, and even if
I did not doubt the truth of his statements, I should ignore
them. We have all sinned, in some way, at some time—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, not all of us,’ Hannah interpolated, and she tried
to look at him admiringly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘In greater or lesser degree,’he said, ‘and I, for one, am
willing to let bygones be bygones. I judge you as I know
you, Miss Mole. I ask you no questions. I wish to hear
nothing from you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>If he had wanted Hannah to tell him everything, this
was the way to do it. His condescension was almost more
than she could bear. Every feeling of antipathy she had
had for him returned in force. She wondered what
influence her little property was having on his leniency
and his wish to hear nothing from her was the strongest
of motives for disobliging him. It would be worth a good
deal to see him floundering in the embarrassment of her
confession, and she was in a mental condition which
craved the satisfaction of desperate measures. She
believed that most of her soreness would be healed if she
could tell him what she had done, and assure him that
she did not care a damn. Yes, if she could use that word
it would do her all the good in the world. But after that—what?
She had nowhere to go, she had very little money,
and even Mrs. Gibson’s house was now closed to her.
She could not go there and, wherever she went, she must
leave Ruth behind.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The tightness of her body slackened, her hands came
together in front of her. ‘You are very generous,’ she said,
and some of her pleasure in offering that tribute was lost
in her fear that it might be true, but her fear was not
great: his generosity would cease when other people
became aware of it. ‘One has one’s family pride, and after
all, there wouldn’t be much sense in punishing me
because of poor cousin Hilda. I’ve always been friends
with her and I always shall be. I haven’t Mr. Pilgrim’s
fear of contamination and I have none of his reforming
spirit. And I’m very fond of her. There must be some
reason why the naughty people are so much nicer than
the others, and Hilda is one of the naughty, nice ones.
But then, perhaps I’m prejudiced,’ she added with a smile.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m afraid I don’t know what you are talking about,’
Robert Corder said with his quick frown.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah’s eyebrows went as high as they could. ‘You
don’t know what I’m talking about? Then what on earth
has Mr. Pilgrim been saying to you? Tell me, please,
Mr. Corder. I must know.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Corder reddened above his beard. ‘He was talking
about you,’ he said reluctantly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘About me? About me? Oh, I see,’ she said slowly.
‘Yes, we’re very much alike. Poor Mr. Pilgrim! How
disappointing for him!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Why should it be disappointing for him?’ Robert
Corder asked with an acuteness she had not been prepared
to meet.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘He’s that kind of man, isn’t he? And you are even
more generous than I thought.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Too generous, I am afraid,’ he said, for he was not
sure that he was wise in associating himself with what
proved to be Miss Mole’s own views, and he could not
forbear expressing his doubts and his general uneasiness
by adding, ‘It must be a remarkable likeness.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It is,’ Hannah said, and with that she turned to go, and
again, a bad sign, he called her back.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Just to clear things up, Miss Mole—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I thought you didn’t want to!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>He frowned again. He was not used to having his
words brought up against him. ‘For your own sake,’ he
said, and her enigmatic smile was a goad, quickening his
temper. ‘Your cousin seems to have been living in her
own little house in a part of the country known to Mr.
Pilgrim. It’s an odd coincidence that you should both
have a little house in the country.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not at all. She was in mine.’ All Hannah’s desire to
enlighten Mr. Corder had gone. This was better sport,
and the rules of the game demanded that she should take
risks, but save her life. She had an exquisite enjoyment
in watching for the feints of her adversary, and into her
mind, stored with detached, incomplete pieces of information,
there darted all the fencing terms she had ever
heard, those bright, gleaming words with the ring of
steel and the quick stamping of feet in them. She had
the advantage of him. She knew what she was going to
do, and she knew that he had no plan of action and she
felt that she had him on her point, but, behind the temporary
excitement, there was waiting for her the moment
when she would have to tell herself that, for all its outward
gallantry, this was a sorry, sordid business.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Robert Corder brought it to an end with an unconvinced
inclination of the head. ‘Thank you, Miss Mole. I don’t
think you will have any more trouble with Mr. Pilgrim,’
he said, and Hannah became aware of Mrs. Corder’s
candid gaze. Whether she approved of these prevarications,
Hannah could not be sure. In saving the younger
of her daughters, Hannah was embarrassing the other,
but would Mrs. Corder look favourably on Mr. Pilgrim
as a husband for Ethel, and had Mr. Pilgrim any intention
of asking for the privilege of the post? There was no
knowing with Ethel. A kind word was enough to set
her heart beating faster; she had probably built high
hopes on the unsteady foundation of such compliments as
would trickle easily from his lips, and Hannah found
comfort in the thought that, if they really cared for each
other, Robert Corder’s antagonism would not separate
them for ever.</p>

<p class='pindent'>That night, when she sat on Ruth’s bed and they discoursed
on their favourite topic, which was where they
would go when they had money and could travel, Hannah
felt that, on the whole, she had done well. It was possible
to be too careful about one’s own soul and, in trying
to help two people, she might help neither. Moreover,
Ruth’s queer, selfish affection was dear to her: it was worth
lying for, and though there was the chance that some day,
and perhaps soon, Ruth would hear about those lies, the
chance had to be taken; and the saying of an old woman
she had known in childhood came back to her, telling her
that, in times of trouble, wisdom lay in living for one
day at a time, but even that one day was more than Hannah
felt she could endure.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XXXIX</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>Ruth had had one lovely day, marred, it is true, by
Ethel’s outburst, but mended, afterwards, by the talk
of those voyages she was to make with Hannah, and on
the next day, Wilfrid had a surprise for her. Hannah was
informed of it in a paraphrase designed to protect her
in case of trouble and, at the mid-day meal, Wilfrid
mentioned, in an off-handed manner, that he and Ruth
were having a little excursion that afternoon. In answer to
questions, he was prepared to say that they meant to
examine some of Radstowe’s public buildings, but, in the
absence of Howard, Robert Corder made a practice of
ignoring Wilfrid’s remarks when he could not find fault
with them, and he said nothing, and Ethel’s concern
with her own affairs deadened her to those of others.</p>

<p class='pindent'>The changeable nature of Robert Corder’s views made
these precautions necessary. He had never been in a
theatre in his life. He had been trained to a distrust of
everything connected with the stage and though his mind
had broadened with the times and the opinions of eminent
fellow-ministers, he had remained aloof. Thus he was
spared the awkwardness of deciding what plays were fit
for him to see and the danger of making unfortunate
mistakes. Ethel also remained aloof, for the sake of her
girls who might be misled in those questionable haunts,
and pastoral plays in the Zoological Gardens were all
she and Ruth had seen. The Spenser-Smiths always
went to the Radstowe pantomime, and if Ruth had been
invited to accompany them, no doubt her father would
have let her go, but it was a different matter when Wilfrid
carried his young cousin off, and she had all the excitement
of this longed for experience, yoked to the difficulty
of wearing her velveteen frock, in honour of Wilfrid and
the dress circle, and getting out of the house before Ethel
could see the significant finery under her concealing coat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>This was safely accomplished while Ethel was noisily
closeted in her bedroom, and Hannah hoped she was
dressing for some pleasure of her own. She felt incapable
of dealing with more of those mad interviews in which
the accused was consulted about the prosecution. Her
mind was dull with a weariness demanding solitude and,
when Ethel had looked in to say she would be out to tea,
Hannah told Doris she had a headache and was not to
be disturbed, and she went upstairs slowly, feeling old
and strangely deserted, now that she had her wish of
being alone.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She had not long for the indulgence of this rare self-pity.
She fell into that daytime sleep which, for the
exhausted, can be profounder than any that comes at
night, and she sank into it as though she floated on subsiding
water, without consciousness of the drop, and,
accompanying the descent, there was the promise of an
oblivion which came upon her before she had had her
fill of waiting for it.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Out of this timelessness, this absolute ease from care,
she woke with a thumping heart, and with an effort, like
a physical wrench, to remember where she was. Darkness
had filled her bedroom, the noise she had heard, on the
point of waking, as that of horses thundering up the stairs,
resolved itself into heavy, hurried footsteps, and her door
was flung open to the sound of Ethel’s voice calling for
Miss Mole. A fire in the house, or in the theatre, Ruth run
over, an accident to Mr. Corder or Mr. Pilgrim, were
possibilities rushing to Hannah’s mind as she put her feet
to the floor and felt Ethel’s presence in the room, and
before she could light the gas, she heard Ethel saying in
breathless catastrophic tones, ‘I’ve been to see Mrs.
Spenser-Smith!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>The match-box slipped from Hannah’s fingers and
while she fumbled for it, her legs aching sharply with her
fright, she muttered angrily, ‘I thought some one was
dead, at least.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It’s worse!’ Ethel cried shrilly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah lit the gas and, looking at Ethel, she thought
she saw what Mr. Blenkinsop had seen ten days ago, for
strong emotions have faces of their own, and those which
had command of Ethel had blotted out the individuality
of her features and she might as easily have been taken
for Hannah Mole or any other woman in distress, as for
Ethel Corder, the competent leader of the Girls’ Club.
It was no wonder Mr. Blenkinsop had prowled up and
down the street, when he had the memory of such a face;
it was no wonder he had not risked further communication
with a woman who could look like that, but Hannah
had responsibilities towards Ethel which were not Mr.
Blenkinsop’s towards her, and whereas she had been
incapable of speech, Ethel’s was torrential under the
encouragement she received.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She had been to see Mrs. Spenser-Smith in search of
comfort and advice. Who else was there she could go
to? She had no mother, her father was angry and Miss
Mole, to whom she told this story, was the cause of half
the trouble, but Mrs. Spenser-Smith who ought to have
been consoling and maternal had shattered what happiness
Ethel had.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘She was cruel to me, Miss Mole,’ Ethel said, with
tears streaming down her face. ‘So cold and haughty.
She said Father was quite right; she didn’t like Mr.
Pilgrim herself. She said—But it can’t be true! If it’s
true, I shall die!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, you won’t die,’ Hannah said soothingly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I shall want to!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m afraid that won’t make any practical difference.
Men have died and worms have eaten them, but not for
love.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, Miss Mole, what do you know about it?’ Ethel
cried. ‘And it wouldn’t be dying of love. It would be
dying of—of shame! For having loved him.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You won’t even die of that,’ Hannah said, very low.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It isn’t that I care what he’s done. I could forgive
anything—only not lies, not lies! I couldn’t love anyone
who told me lies.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then you’ll have a remarkably narrow choice,’ Hannah
said drily. ‘But, it seems to me, the important question
is whether he loves you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But of course he does!’ The flow of Ethel’s tears
stopped and went on again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Has he said so? In so many words? Was it what they
used to call a declaration? Unmistakably?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ Ethel said, dropping her head. ‘He told me
yesterday—but I knew before that.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then why in the world were you crying last night when
Ruth and I came in? You ought to have been jumping
for joy, girl!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But Father came and said awful things about him, and
Mrs. Spenser-Smith says he isn’t a good man. She says
he’s telling tales about you because he’s afraid you’ll
tell them about him. She says you know something
against him. You don’t, do you, Miss Mole? You said
you’d never seen him till the Spenser-Smiths’ party—he
told me so, but who am I to believe?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah sat on her bed, looking at her folded hands and
for a few minutes she was more occupied with thoughts
of Lilla than of Ethel or herself. ‘So you told Mrs.
Spenser-Smith what you had heard about me, did you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes. I didn’t mean to, but it came out.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘It would!’ Hannah said, and she smiled as she pictured
Lilla’s horror, her immediate belief in her cousin’s guilt,
and her equal quickness in protecting her own reputation
by using the hint Hannah had dropped about Mr. Pilgrim’s
little secrets.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And oh, Miss Mole, don’t tell me lies to comfort me,’
Ethel begged.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah had already made her decision, but these
courageous words ennobled the task she had set herself
and though she doubted Mr. Pilgrim’s worthiness of the
girl who had uttered them, she would not allow the doubt
to influence her. ‘You can go on loving him,’ she said.
‘He hasn’t told you any lies, not about me, anyhow, and
I don’t suppose he has ever committed what he would
call a sin. That’s what’s the matter with him. You see,
he’s got a grudge against me. I shut my door in his face
once, and I’d do it again, and, worse still, I believe I
laughed at him. He can’t forgive that, and then, if he
loves you, he has an interest in looking after you and
trying to get rid of me. He wouldn’t like me to do you
harm. I don’t blame him. I don’t blame anybody.
What’s the use?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then wasn’t there a cousin Hilda?’ Ethel asked
timidly, making sure of Mr. Pilgrim’s perfections before
she gave way to her joy.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not in the flesh,’ Hannah said, ‘but in every other
way, there was, and now she has vanished and her works
follow her. The evil that men do—’ Her words slipped
into silence and after a moment she added, very softly,
to herself, ‘But it was not evil.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>She was not looking at Ethel, but she could feel her
fascinated stare at this new species, at a woman who
seemed good, who had never failed to give help when it
was wanted, and yet confessed to wickedness, without
apology or excuse.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I shall have to tell Father,’ Ethel said with difficulty.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah raised her head sharply. ‘I don’t see the
necessity,’ she said, and she thought of Ruth, laughing at
the pantomime and proud of Wilfrid’s company.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But don’t you see, I must. It’s only fair to Mr. Pilgrim,
and to me. Mrs. Spenser-Smith will be saying things
about him. Why, it might ruin him!’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then tell him,’ Hannah said wearily.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m sorry, Miss Mole, I really am. It seems mean,
I know, and I’ve always liked you, but you see, don’t you?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>What Hannah saw most clearly was her own shabby,
homeless figure, and it amazed her that Ethel did not see
it too, but she said, ‘Yes, yes, I see it all. Don’t tell him
until Ruth’s in bed. And don’t tell her at all. I’ll send
her to bed early, and I’ll go out. It would be uncomfortable
for you, wouldn’t it, to know I was in the next room?
Wouldn’t it?’ she persisted.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, yes, Miss Mole, it would. You think of everything,
and I’ll do my best. I’ll ask Father to forgive you and,
you’ve been so good to us, I’m sure he will.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Well, leave me now,’ Hannah said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She counted her money. She would not stay to be
blessed by Mr. Corder’s forgiveness. She would go to-morrow.
She had no intention of going without giving
Robert Corder an opportunity to repeat his generosity
and herself the unlikely pleasure of refusing it. She had
made her choice. She had sacrificed Ruth to Ethel’s
chance of happiness, but she could not sacrifice all her
dignity to Ruth, who had her Uncle Jim to care for her,
and to Uncle Jim, Hannah wrote, before she went downstairs,
and, turning to look at the little ship which had
been her companion for so long, she decided that Ruth
should have it in exchange for Hannah Mole.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Years seemed to pass over her head while she waited
for Ruth and Wilfrid to come in, and while she listened to
all they had to tell her. The evening meal, strained by
Robert Corder’s general disgust with uncalled for circumstances,
Ethel’s nervous excitement and Ruth’s
carefulness to let fall no revealing word, seemed everlasting,
and then there was the night-light to be lit for
the last time, and there were more of Ruth’s confidences
to hear, before Hannah could leave the house, bare-headed
and wearing her old ulster.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She hesitated at Mr. Samson’s gate, but she did not
open it. She was afraid she would cry if anyone spoke
kindly to her, and more afraid that the signs of this weakness
were on her face. And why was she so miserable?
She had foreseen all this and been prepared to meet it
without a murmur. Was it because she was leaving Ruth,
because her secret was being discussed in the study, or
because she had no money and no home? It was because
of all of these, but they were only part of her distress, for
she could no longer trust that spring of hope which,
hitherto, had always flowed for her, sometimes feebly,
more often with iridescent bubbles which might break
as she put her lips to them and change their shape, but
kept a quality that refreshed her. The spring had run
dry and, as though she went in search of another, she
hurried up the street in a drizzling rain and followed the
route she and Mr. Blenkinsop had taken when they had
walked together at night and found nothing to say to one
another. It was strange to remember that she would have
been as happy, then, without him, and now, with each
step she took, her desire to speak to him increased, not
to tell him anything, just to speak to him, before she went
away.</p>

<p class='pindent'>She went round the hill with no regard for the cliffs
and the dark river and the sparkling docks she loved so
well. She knew they were there and, in a way, they
comforted her, but she did not look at them. She hurried
down the sloping ground, across The Green and across
Albert Square, and she did not slacken her pace until
she reached Mrs. Gibson’s door. The door was open,
and Mr. Blenkinsop, in his coat and hat, was turning to
shut it for the night.</p>

<div><h1>CHAPTER XL</h1></div>

<p class='pindent'>‘I have just come back from Beresford Road,’ he said,
‘They told me you were out.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘They?’ Hannah said anxiously.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Blenkinsop smiled. ‘A loose expression! I only
saw the servant. How did we miss each other?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ve been for a walk,’ Hannah said, watching Mr.
Blenkinsop hanging up his coat and hat.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You oughtn’t to do that, at this time of night. And
nothing on your head! It’s quite wet,’ he said in annoyance.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What time is it?’ They spoke in low tones, careful for
the slumbers of Mrs. Gibson and the little maid and the
people in the basement.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ten o’clock.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then I oughtn’t to be here, either. I must go back.’
The smile of the alert Miss Mole was weak and wavering,
like a nervous child’s. ‘I don’t really know why I came
at all,’ she said, and she looked at him as though she
expected him to explain her action. ‘I shall be locked out.
I forgot to bring my latch-key.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then we shall have to trouble Mr. Corder to let us
in,’ Mr. Blenkinsop said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>That pronoun had an extraordinarily friendly sound
in Hannah’s ears and she repeated it. ‘We’d better go
now.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No. Come upstairs. I’m going to make some tea.
You’re cold and wet.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But—’ Hannah began, and Mr. Blenkinsop said
severely. ‘Just try to forget there are any such people as
the Corders. I’ll go up first and turn on the light.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Blenkinsop’s room was warm and glowing with
firelight and a shaded lamp, and there was not a sound
in the house but the lapping of the fire and not a sound
in the street. A dreary peace stole over Hannah, an
indifference to duty and disaster, and she went towards
one of the deep armchairs in an unreasonable conviction
that if she could once get between its arms she need never
get out again.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Take off your coat, first,’ Mr. Blenkinsop said. He
was busy at a cupboard, getting out cups and saucers
and a cannister of tea.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘My poor old coat!’ Hannah said with a vague laugh.
Months ago she had promised Ruth not to wear it. ‘But
it will have to last for a long time yet,’ she said to herself.
She leaned back and shut her eyes and listened to Mr.
Blenkinsop’s movements, to the change in the notes of
the kettle, and then the hissing sound as tea and water
met, and she did not open them until he said, ‘There,
drink that.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Suddenly she was awake, remembering when she had
last seen Mr. Blenkinsop, and urgent with all the things
she ought to say to him before she went away. ‘Have
you taken that cottage?’ she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No. I was going to ask you if you’d like to sell it.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Not to you,’ she said quickly.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I don’t want it. I’ve found another that will suit
us better, I think.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But how—’ she was realising that she had not told
him the house was hers. It was natural for him to know,
and right, but she had not told him. ‘How do you know
it belongs to me?’ she asked, and though it was right for
him to know, her eyes were wide and her mouth dropped
piteously.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’ve been there again,’ he said with a slight embarrassment,
but a steady look. ‘I don’t like breaking appointments,’
and at this description of the chase she had
given him, she laughed without much mirth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Mr. Blenkinsop responded with a smile and then,
quietly, looking at his well-shod feet, he said, ‘I’ve turned
the fellow out.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Like an arrow from a bow, Hannah’s thin body darted
forward, a hand on each arm of her chair, and the last
embers of her loyalty leapt into a blaze under the indignant
breath with which she cried, ‘How dare you? How dare
you? What business was it of yours to interfere?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Without raising his head, Mr. Blenkinsop turned it
towards the fire. ‘Somebody had to do it,’ he said mildly.
‘You see, when it came to talking business, he couldn’t
produce a deed or a lease and he isn’t a very competent
liar. In the end, he had to refer me to the owner so I
just told him he’d better go.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Then you can just go back and tell him he can
stay.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh, he’s gone by this time, and the man who owns
the farm is willing to buy the place. Somebody has to
look after you,’ he explained patiently.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah stood up and reached out blindly for her coat.
‘But not you,’ she said, and her voice seemed to come
from the very source of sorrow. ‘Isn’t there anybody in
the world who won’t trample on the few things I’ve had?’
she asked plaintively. ‘All these people—why must
they? And you—I didn’t think you would do it.’ Her
anger took hold of her again. ‘What right had you to
interfere?’ she repeated. Then pure pain overcame her
anger and, she said, ‘It doesn’t matter. It doesn’t matter,
but I didn’t think you would do it. I didn’t think you
would try to find out why I ran away.’ Again she put out
her hands for her coat, but they did not meet it and she
sat down again, as though she had forgotten what she
meant to do.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘What else could I do?’ he said simply. ‘I told you I
couldn’t leave it at that. You were in trouble and you
wouldn’t tell me what it was. I see now that I ought not
to have gone without asking you, but I’m glad I did.
No, I ought not to have gone, but when I went I thought
there might be something I could do for you. All sorts
of queer ideas came into my head and I never thought,
I never thought for a moment—.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah dropped her hands from her face and he saw
the familiar, teasing smile. ‘And yet it ought to have been
the first thing that occurred to you.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Ought it? I suppose I’m stupid. You’ll have to forgive
me. I saw he was trying to rob you, or not caring
whether he did or not, but I didn’t turn him out until—until—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No, no,’ Hannah mourned. ‘Don’t tell me. Don’t tell
me anything he said. Is there no end to it? I didn’t
mind your knowing about it, but I didn’t want you to
see him. That’s why I ran away. I didn’t want you to
see him and now you’ve seen him and talked to him.
You’ve seen the kind of man I loved—and lived with.
It was the only thing, the only thing about me I didn’t
want you to know—the kind of man—and even that
I couldn’t keep. I can’t keep anything! Oh, let me go
back. I must go back.’ With a tremendous effort at self-command
she changed her voice to one of acid amusement.
‘It seems to me that your affection for one woman
has made rather a busybody of you, Mr. Blenkinsop.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘I’m afraid that’s true,’ he said. ‘Drink your tea. There’s
no hurry. I want to tell you about the other cottage we’ve
got hold of. It belongs to Ridding’s brother-in-law.
He’s a farmer and he’ll be able to keep an eye on Ridding
and help him with his fowls.’ He was looking at the fire,
avoiding her eyes, and he did not see astonishment
gradually spreading over her face. ‘Ridding will be better
in the country. An office isn’t the place for a man like
that, and Mrs. Ridding thinks it will suit the baby. They’ll
be going in about a fortnight and it’s a great load off my
mind,’ he ended with a deep sigh.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Take my cup,’ Hannah said in a strangled voice.
‘Take my cup. I shall spill the tea. I’m going to laugh.
But I can’t!’ she cried after a moment. ‘Oh, what’s going
to happen to me if I can’t laugh any more?’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘You’re tired out,’ he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, but it isn’t that.’ She looked about her, seeking
an explanation. ‘It must be because it isn’t really funny,’
she said in a low, puzzled voice. ‘You see, I thought you
were in love with Mrs. Ridding. I thought the cottage was
for you and her.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Good God!’ Mr. Blenkinsop exclaimed in horror, and
again Hannah had the sensation that her heart was
shrinking to the size of a pea. He was kind to her, as he
was kind to Mrs. Ridding, but this was what he thought
of such love affairs as hers, and now she stood up with
a deceptive briskness.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘And that,’ she said, in a hard voice, ‘just shows you
what kind of a mind I’ve got. I suspect everybody else
of what I did myself! And now I must go back, for Ruth
may want me.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘She can’t want you as much as I do,’ Mr. Blenkinsop
said quietly, in unmistakable accents.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Hannah stood quite still. She clung to her coat, but
it dropped out of her hand, and she said slowly, addressing
the wall in front of her, ‘This isn’t true.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes, it’s true,’ he said. ‘That’s why I’ve been bothering
about the Riddings, to do something I thought would
please you. And if you’re going to say you don’t care
about me—’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I’m not!’ Hannah cried, with a wide, tremulous
smile. ‘I’m not! Don’t talk to me for a little while.
Don’t say anything,’ she begged and Mr. Blenkinsop was
obediently silent while she lay back in her chair, telling
herself that the miracle she had believed in had really
happened, it had really happened, it was here, in this
room, but in a moment she started up again. ‘I’ll tell
you what we’ll do. We’ll sell the cottage and give the
money to the Riddings.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘As a thank-offering!’ he said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Yes,’ she said, rather wistfully, ‘if it seems like that
to you. Well, you know everything about me.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘No,’ he said, ‘and I don’t think I ever shall,’ a speech
more satisfying to Hannah than any more lover-like
protestation.</p>

<p class='pindent'>It was twelve o’clock when they walked down Beresford
Road, and Hannah had no latch-key, and Mr. Blenkinsop
was looking forward to his interview with Robert Corder.
And, after all, Ruth need never know, Hannah thought,
in great content, and Mr. Corder would be relieved of
the responsibility of taking action, and Ethel would marry
Mr. Pilgrim and, surely, Uncle Jim would rescue Ruth
and Robert Corder would marry Patsy Withers and find
her somewhat dull after the incalculableness of Miss
Mole, and, for this misfortune, Lilla would find compensation
in the disappearance of a cousin who would cause
her no more anxiety. The miracle had happened and
though, through the wonder of it, there were regrets
for Ruth, Hannah had never been less inclined to doubt
that everything was for the best.</p>

<p class='pindent'>Can this be me? she asked herself. She had run up the
road, two hours ago, in a drizzling rain and an unbearable
loneliness, and now she had hold of Mr. Blenkinsop’s
hand and the stars were shining.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘We’ll go away,’ he was saying, and she glanced up at
him and wondered if, like herself, he saw something
whimsical and unlikely in their love. She hoped he did
not. She could trust herself to see it with other people’s
eyes and laugh, with them, without doing it any injury,
but, for him, she wished this happiness to be too solemn
and beautiful for mirth.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘We’ll go away,’ he said. ‘I’ll leave the bank. You’ve
made me rather ashamed of the bank. It’s too safe.’</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘But I want safety now! That’s the worst of happiness—it
makes you want safety. We mustn’t want it. I’ve always
been afraid of wanting too much,’ she said.</p>

<p class='pindent'>‘Oh—my poor heart!’ Mr. Blenkinsop exclaimed in a
broken voice, and stopped and stooped to kiss her.</p>

  </body>