<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
			<p>At this hour when it was too early for dinner and too late for tea, the shop was almost empty and a lady who was sitting in full view of the door and who started at Hannah’s entry, immediately repressed all signs of dismay and resigned herself to the impossibility of avoiding recognition. She laid down her knife and fork while Hannah, on her part, advanced with every appearance of enthusiasm.</p>
			<p>“Lilla! What luck!” she exclaimed loudly, and then chuckled contentedly as her eyes, which were not quite brown, or green, or grey, surveyed all that was visible of the seated figure. “Just the same!” she murmured, and her large, amiable mouth was tilted at the corners. “If I’d pictured how you’d look if I met you⁠—but to tell the truth, Lilla, I haven’t been thinking of you lately⁠—I should have imagined you exactly as you are. That hat⁠—so suitably autumnal, but not wintry⁠—”</p>
			<p>“For goodness’ sake, sit down Hannah, and lower your voice a little. What on earth are you doing here?”</p>
			<p>Hannah sat down, and on the chair occupied by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith’s elegant, monogrammed handbag, she placed her own shabby one, with a deliberate comparison of their values which made Lilla jerk her head irritably, but there was nothing envious in Hannah’s expression when she looked up.</p>
			<p>“And your coat!” she went on. “It’s wonderful how your tailor eliminates that telltale thickness at the back of the middle-aged neck. But perhaps you haven’t got one. Anyhow, you look very nice and it’s a pleasure to see you.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith blinked these compliments aside and remarked, “I thought you were in Bradford, or some place of that sort.”</p>
			<p>“Not for years,” Hannah said, peering across the table at Lilla’s plate. “What are you eating? And why? Have you caught the restaurant habit, or haven’t you got a cook?”</p>
			<p>“I’ve had the same cook for more than ten years,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith replied loftily.</p>
			<p>“I call that very creditable,” Hannah said, beckoning to the waitress and ordering her coffee and bun. “I wish you’d ask her how it’s done.”</p>
			<p>“By giving satisfaction,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith replied loftily.</p>
			<p>“And getting it, I suppose,” Hannah sighed. “Oh well! What you get on the swings, you lose on the roundabouts, and I’d rather have my experience than her character, for what, after all, can she do with it, except keep it? And it must be an awful responsibility. Worse than pearls, because you can’t insure it.”</p>
			<p>“On the contrary,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith began, but Hannah held up a hand.</p>
			<p>“I know. I know all the moral maxims. It sounds so easy. But then, all employers are not like you, Lilla. This coffee smells very good, but alas, how small the bun appears! Yes, your servants are well fed, I haven’t a doubt, and I’m sure their bedrooms are beyond reproach. You should see the one I’m occupying now! It’s in the basement, among the beetles. The servant sleeps in the attic, safe from amorous policemen. Don’t frown so anxiously, Lilla. I am obviously in no danger.” She sat back in her chair and shut her eyes. “But I can hear the ships. I can hear the ships as they come hooting up the river. D’you know what nostalgia is? It’s what I was suffering from when, as you put it, I was in ‘some place of that sort.’ So I spent some of my hard-earned⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Don’t shout,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith begged.</p>
			<p>“It doesn’t matter. With your well-known charitable propensities, I shall only be taken for one of your hangers-on⁠—which I may be yet, I warn you. I spent quite a lot of money on Nonconformist religious weeklies, and very nearly reestablished my character by reading them ostentatiously. But it was the advertisements I was after. I wanted to be in Radstowe, and Radstowe, I knew, would proclaim its needs in the religious weeklies. I took the first offer, at a pittance, too late to see the lilacs and laburnums, but in time for what, I’m sure, you call the autumn foliage, Lilla dear. And,” she added sadly, “I shan’t last until next spring and it was the spring I wanted, for tonight, as ever is, I fear I’m going to get the sack.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith frowned again, and after an anxious, exploring glance which, happily, lighted on no face she knew, she said sharply, “And you sit here, eating cakes!”</p>
			<p>Lifting her level eyebrows, Hannah looked with amusement at her plate, where there was a scattering of crumbs. “I was always reckless,” she murmured, and then, with an air of being politely eager to shift the conversation from herself, she asked effusively, “And how is Ernest? And how are the children? I should love to see the children!”</p>
			<p>“They’re at school,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith, promptly putting an end to Hannah’s hopes. “Ernest, as usual, is quite well. He overworks, of course,” she added, between pride and resignation. “And now, Hannah, what’s this about losing your situation? And do tell me the truth⁠—if you can. Who are you living with?”</p>
			<p>“A tall, gaunt woman with a false hair-front. Dresses in black⁠—I’m supposed to be mending her second best at this moment. Even her stays are black and they reach from her armpits to her knees. Wears black beads in memory of the departed and has his photograph, enlarged and tinted, on an easel in the drawing-room. Lives in Channing Square, name of Widdows. Prophetic! I suppose that’s why he risked it.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t be vulgar, Hannah. I think jokes about marriage are in the very worst taste. Widdows? I’ve never heard of her.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps that’s why she’s so unpleasant,” Miss Mole said gently.</p>
			<p>The robin-brightness of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith’s brown eyes was dimmed with disapproval. She was not stupid, though she chose to let Hannah think her so, and she said severely, “According to you, Hannah, every employer you’ve ever had was objectionable.”</p>
			<p>“Not all,” Hannah said quickly, “but naturally, the ones I loved I lost⁠—through no fault of my own. They were exceptional people. The others? Yes, what can you expect? It’s the what-d’you-call-it of the position, and perhaps⁠—it’s a long chance but perhaps⁠—there are people who find <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Widdows lovable.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t adapt yourself,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith complained. “It was the same at school. You were always kicking against authority. But you ought to have learnt sense by this time and if you leave this <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Widdows, what are you going to do?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know,” said Miss Mole, “but I really think I’ll have another bun. I’ve got a spare twopence-halfpenny in my pocket. I earned it⁠—by sleight-of-hand. Yes, another of those excellent buns, please, and a curranty one. Doctors,” she informed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith, “tell us that currants have sustaining properties, and I badly need them. I don’t know what I’m going to do and I’m not worrying about it much. I’ve got a whole month for making plans and I always enjoy the month I’m under notice. I feel so free and jolly, and there have been occasions when I’ve been asked to stay on, after all. Happiness,” she said, a slight oiliness in her tone, “is a great power for good, is it not?”</p>
			<p>“Tut!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith. “Don’t try any of that with me! I know you too well.”</p>
			<p>Miss Mole chuckled. “But not so very well⁠—in Radstowe. I’ve been careful of your reputation. I haven’t told a soul that we’re related. I didn’t even put you to the inconvenience of letting you know I was here. You should give me credit for that. And if I’d said I was the cousin, once removed, of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith, that old black cat might have been different for, of course, everybody knows who you are! But there, I never think of myself!”</p>
			<p>“If you’d been entirely penniless, it would have been much better for you,” Lilla pronounced distinctly. “I suppose that house of yours is let?”</p>
			<p>“House?” said Hannah. “Oh, you mean my teeny-weeny cottage.”</p>
			<p>“You get the rent from that, don’t you?”</p>
			<p>“I suppose so,” Hannah said, smiling oddly, “but really, my money has such a trick of slipping through my fingers⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Then you can’t go there, when you leave your situation. You’d better eat humble pie, Hannah, for what’s to become of you I don’t know.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” said Miss Mole in a drawl, “it’s just possible that I might find myself in your nice red and white house, and no later than tomorrow, for I may be dismissed without warning. In your nice house, behind the lace curtains and the geraniums and the gravel sweep, having my breakfast in bed, though I’m afraid my calico nightgowns might shock your housemaid.”</p>
			<p>“I wear calico ones myself,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith, putting the seal of her approval on them.</p>
			<p>“But I don’t suppose your housemaid does.”</p>
			<p>“And breakfast in bed is not what you want, Hannah.”</p>
			<p>“That’s all you know about it,” Hannah said.</p>
			<p>“What you want,” Lilla continued, “is a place where you’ll settle down and be useful, and if you’re useful you’ll be happy. Now, can’t you make up your mind to please this <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Widdows?”</p>
			<p>“She doesn’t want to be pleased. She’s been longing for the moment when she could turn me out and find another victim, and now she’s got it. And I’m not afraid of starving while I have a kind, rich cousin like you, dear. And an old schoolfellow, too! What I want at my age, which is your own, is a little light work. In a house like yours, you can surely offer me that. You must want someone to arrange the flowers and sew the buttons on your gloves, and I shouldn’t expect to appear at dinner when there’s company. You wouldn’t have to consider my feelings, because I haven’t got any, and if the cook gave notice, I could cook, and if the parlourmaid gave notice, I should be tripping round the damask.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I daresay! And spilling the gravy on it! And, as it happens, my servants don’t give notice. At the first sign of discontent, they’re told to go.”</p>
			<p>“That’s the way to treat them!” Hannah cried encouragingly. “But if they fell ill, Lilla,” she leant forward coaxingly, “think what a comfort I should be to you! And you know, Ernest had always a soft spot in his heart for me.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Lilla, “Ernest’s soft spots are often highly inconvenient. Today, for instance, when I wanted the car to take me home after a busy afternoon, he chooses to lend it to someone else. I have to be at the chapel this evening for the Literary Society Meeting and I should be worn out if I made two journeys across the Downs beforehand.”</p>
			<p>“Good for your figure,” Hannah said. “The time may come when your tailor won’t be able to cope with it. So that’s why you’re dining out. I should like to see you at the Literary Meeting, trying not to yawn. What’s the subject?”</p>
			<p>“Charles Lamb.”</p>
			<p>“Hardy annual,” Hannah muttered, twitching her nose.</p>
			<p>“It’s a duty,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith said patiently, yet with a touch of grandeur. “I’d much rather stay at home with a nice book, but these things have to be supported, for the sake of the young people.”</p>
			<p>“Ah yes, but it isn’t the young people who go to them. It’s the old girls, like myself, who have nothing else to do. I’ve seen them, sitting on the hard benches, half asleep, like fowls gone to roost.”</p>
			<p>“They’ll go to sleep tonight,” Lilla admitted, “though,” she added as she remembered to keep Hannah in her place, “I don’t see why you should try to be funny at their expense. Trying to be funny is one of your failings.”</p>
			<p>Miss Mole answered meekly. “I know I ought never to see a joke unless my superiors make one, and then I’ve got to be convulsed with admiring merriment. I’ve no right to a will nor an opinion of my own, but somehow⁠—I’m that contrary!⁠—I insist on laughing when I’m amused and exercising my poor intelligence. Let me come with you tonight, Lilla, and I might make a speech.”</p>
			<p>“You might make a fool of yourself,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith, picking up her modestly rich fur necklet and settling it at her throat. “Go back to Channing Square, at once, and do, for goodness sake, try to see which side your bread is buttered. And, in any case, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Blenkinsop’s lecture wouldn’t entertain you. He’s rather a dull young man. What’s the matter?” she asked, for Hannah had put down the bun she was lifting towards her mouth and the mouth remained open.</p>
			<p>“Such a funny name!” Hannah murmured. She leaned back and folded her hands on her lap. “I like to coordinate⁠—or whatever the word is⁠—my impressions with other people’s facts. Now, that name. I should have suspected its owner of being a dull young man, a rather owlish young man, with a Biblical Christian name. Am I right?”</p>
			<p>“His name is Samuel,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith, impatient with this topic.</p>
			<p>“And he’s a member of your chapel?”</p>
			<p>“Not a very worthy one, I’m sorry to say. He’s highly irregular.”</p>
			<p>Now Hannah leaned forward, her eyes sparkling. “You’re not going to tell me he’s a bit of a rake?”</p>
			<p>The droop of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith’s eyelids effaced a world which had any acquaintance with rakes. “Irregular in his attendance on Sundays,” she said coldly.</p>
			<p>“That upsets one of my theories, but it’s interesting. Are you going, Lilla? Try to find a corner for me in your red and white house. I’ve been past it several times. I like the colour scheme. The conjunction of the yellow gravel with the geraniums⁠—”</p>
			<p>“The geraniums are over,” Lilla said, “and what colour do you expect gravel to be? I shall ask Ernest if he knows of any suitable post for you.”</p>
			<p>“Ernest’s reply will be obvious. You’d better not ask him.”</p>
			<p>“And then I’ll write to you.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t bother, don’t bother,” Miss Mole said airily. “I’ll come to tea one afternoon. These,” she smiled maliciously, “are not my best clothes⁠—but very nearly. My shoes, however,” she thrust out a surprisingly elegant foot, “will always stand inspection.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith gave an unwilling, downward glance. “Absurd!” she said. “You’ve no sense of proportion.”</p>
			<p>“Yet I risked this one,” Hannah pointed to her right foot, “without a thought for its beauty. Fortunately, it’s hardly scratched.” She looked up, her face rejuvenated by mischief. “I broke a window with it, Lilla.”</p>
			<p>Incredulity struggled with curiosity in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith, and curiosity with her determination to deny Hannah the pleasure of thinking herself interesting. “Pooh!” she said lightly, and then her unpractised imagination took a clumsy flight. “You don’t mean to tell me that woman had locked you out of the house?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t mean to tell you anything,” Miss Mole said sweetly, and with the smile on her lips she watched her cousin’s admirable exit which was designed to show the increasing number of people in the shop that she was of very different quality from that of the person she left behind her.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
