<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>VI</h2>
			<p>Beresford Road and Prince’s Road meet at a point just below Albert Square, and as they are both on the western side of Nunnery Road, where the tramcars go up to the Downs and down to the city, they can claim to be in Upper Radstowe, but, except for that terraced row of houses on one side of what the errand boys call Prince’s, they might belong to any other mid-Victorian suburb. The houses in Beresford Road are just emerging from the basement era. Their kitchens are still a few steps below the level of the sitting-rooms, but they have been raised from the cellarage whence a sturdier, or dumber, race of servants was content to ascend a long flight of stairs an innumerable number of times a day. Some of the houses are surrounded by their own gardens; others look like one house and are really two, with their entrances deceptively placed at the side; they give, and want to give, the impression that nothing unusual or indecorous can happen within their walls, and the red bulk of Beresford Road Congregational Chapel proclaims that Nonconformity has been received into the bosom of respectability. Perhaps the great days of the chapel are over. It was built for the benefit of those rising families whose incomes permitted a removal to this part of Radstowe and whose religious convictions had not changed with their fortunes; at a time when there was still something faintly defiant in marching a large, decently clad family to chapel in the face of churchgoers who had never dared anything for freedom, but now that the church had amiably acknowledged dissenters as men and brothers, the only flavour left in Nonconformity was the unpleasant knowledge that its supporters were still considered socially doubtful. Big families were now out of fashion: many of those girls and boys who had regarded Sundays as half festival, half penance, who had been glad to wear their best clothes over the prickly discomfort of their clean under garments, and to watch their acquaintances through the boredom of the services, had moved on to what was called a better part of Upper Radstowe, reared two or three children and quietly seceded from the faith of their fathers. The bolder spirits, who still went anywhere, went to the Unitarian Church, but Upper Radstowe was not the right soil for Nonconformity, which flourished more abundantly on the other side of Nunnery Road, and the appointment of Robert Corder to Beresford Road Chapel, fifteen years ago, had been an attempt to stir the sluggish ground with the chemical of a vigorous personality. His predecessor had been a gentle old man who preached patiently to the shining empty pews and could not be expected to lure young people to hear him, while Robert Corder was a bold, upstanding figure and the sight and sound of him advertised the vitality of his faith. He could be seen, striding about the streets, leaping on to moving tramcars and off them, rushing to and from committee meetings, always in a hurry, yet always willing to check his speed for a few words with his acquaintances, and these words were cheery, optimistic and delivered in a loud voice, unless a quieter sympathy was called for. A member of his chapel brought him to a halt; a deacon could divert him from his course, and then he would stride on, still faster, making up for time which, as he often and merrily told these waylayers, was not lost, but had gone, before he knew it.</p>
			<p>These were habits and occupations with which Miss Mole was not yet acquainted. From the window of her bed-sitting room she could see the roof of the chapel and she had noticed it as a warm patch of red among the other roofs and the trees. She was a specialist in roofs and from many high windows in Upper Radstowe they could be seen in every shape and colour. They slid down the steep slope to Lower Radstowe, red, grey, blue and green, and spread like a flower garden over the city. There were old red tiles in close neighbourhood to shining slates, there were mossy green roofs squeezed between the walls of higher houses and, with all these variations in height, there were trees overtopping chimneys and chimneys sending their smoke into other people’s windows, but this could not be seen from Hannah’s room. Her view of the newer part of Upper Radstowe was ordinary enough, and she had made the most of the chapel roof until it had suddenly changed into a portent. She liked it no longer, yet she looked at it more often: she imagined herself sitting under it, a small drab speck against the varnish, and, during the days which passed before she heard from Lilla, she spent some time in Beresford Road, feeling like a conspirator or a private detective. She tried to get into the chapel and found, as she expected, that the doors were locked. “This,” she said, addressing the ivy which grew round the porch, “is enough to drive anybody to Rome, and I’ve a good mind to go there. I suppose the place is so ugly that they daren’t let anyone see it unless there’s one of their entertainments going on, and then they’ve got each other’s hats to look at. Not,” she added, “that there can be anything much in the way of hats.”</p>
			<p>She would have been very gloomy if she had not been enjoying her prejudices and her prophetic powers. She was sure the red roof was painted blue on the inside, like the firmament, and sprinkled with opaque golden stars: she had seen <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Corder’s house, <abbr>No.</abbr> 14⁠—a long stone’s throw from the chapel and on the other side of the road⁠—and her forebodings had been justified. It was one of the coupled houses, with an asphalt path running up to the inconspicuous door. There were a bow and a flat window on each of two floors and a small one, like an eye, in the gable. Hannah had strolled past the house adventurously: at any moment <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Corder might appear and it would be hard to look like a woman with a right to be in the road. She was not curious about him: it was the house she was concerned with, and if she could put her head inside its door she would know, at once, whether she could be happy in it. That, however, was further than she dared to go and she had to content herself with an external view, finding nothing hopeful in the lace curtains and the plot of grass edged with laurels and confined by iron railings. The architect of that house had been no artist. It was an ugly house, yet its twin, next door, looked infinitely more habitable, though the Venetian blinds were askew. Dusty-looking red curtains, clasped by brass chains, draped the lower bow window and a birdcage containing a canary reminded Hannah painfully of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Widdows. <abbr>No.</abbr> 16 was quite as unattractive as <abbr>No.</abbr> 14 to the eye, but Hannah would have felt happier if the red curtains had belonged to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Corder.</p>
			<p>She was startled, the next morning, when she passed again, to hear a harsh voice bidding her good day and, standing on tiptoe to peer over the privet hedge which grew above <abbr>No.</abbr> 16’s railings, she saw a parrot in a cage in the middle of the grass plot. The bird leered at her for an instant and then with an insulting expression, pretended it had never seen her, though she offered it the usual complimentary remarks.</p>
			<p>“Fond of birds?” asked another voice, and a face popped over the privet hedge, close to her own. “Picking up the dead leaves,” said its owner, showing her a handful, “and giving Poll an airing at the same time. Can’t let him out alone, ’cos of the cats. Even my own cats. Jealousy, I suppose. Now you’ll tell me that a bird is always a bird to a cat⁠—and they’d eat Minnie, that’s the canary, there, if they could get her, I haven’t a doubt, but⁠—and I’ve made a study of this⁠—it’s not food they’re after with Poll. It’s the human voice that upsets them and he’s remarkably chatty at times. The human voice, coming from the wrong place. It’s natural, when you come to think of it.”</p>
			<p>Miss Mole had discovered why <abbr>No.</abbr> 16 was a fitter habitation for her than <abbr>No.</abbr> 14. She recognised something native to herself in this elderly man who could fall into conversation with a stranger, something congenial in his battered old face and his roguish, disrespectful eye. As much as she could see of him was arrayed in a sleeved woollen waistcoat, a high, stiff collar, and a red tie pierced by a pin with a diamond and opal horseshoe head, and he had the look of a man who would wear his cap in the house.</p>
			<p>“That’s very interesting,” she said, dropping back on to her heels, while he pressed closer to the hedge to get a better sight of her, and his humorous, rather watery eyes seemed to be comparing her unfavourably with all the fine-looking women they had rested on.</p>
			<p>“Saw you yesterday, didn’t I?” he asked. “Shaving at the time, up there,” he jerked a thumb backwards, “and saw a woman at the chapel door. ‘That’s a new thing,’ I said to myself. Couldn’t make it out at all, so I kept my eye on you. Seemed funny to me.”</p>
			<p>“It would have been funnier if I’d got in,” Hannah said with a sniff.</p>
			<p>“Ah, not my idea of fun, but if you want to get in,” he jerked his thumb sideways and his tone made large allowances for human vagaries, “you’ll get the key, I dessay, next door. Parson lives there. Went out half an hour ago with his coat tails flying. Pretended he didn’t see me,” he gave Hannah a slow wink, “but I could tell him a thing or two if I liked. Only, as it happens,” he sank out of sight and his voice came muffled through the hedge, “I don’t like.” She could hear him gathering up more leaves.</p>
			<p>A farewell seemed unnecessary, to go without one seemed rude, and she murmured something to which he made no response, but he had brightened her outlook; to live next door to a man who could tell Robert Corder a thing or two, to discover what those things were, would be an alleviation of the dreariness she anticipated, and when she opened Lilla’s letter with the news that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Spenser-Smith had had her way and that Miss Mole would be expected in Beresford Road on the Tuesday of next week, Hannah could think more lightly of her bondage and face the fact that there were not many pounds left in her purse, but she made a wry face at Lilla’s much-underlined conclusion in which she pointed out that with fifty pounds a year, her board and lodging and the rent from her house in the country, Hannah would surely be able to lay something by for a rainy day.</p>
			<p>“About enough to buy a cheap umbrella,” Hannah said, flipping the letter across the table before she tore it into little pieces in carefulness that the secret of her relationship to Lilla should be kept.</p>
			<p>For <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Gibson, the next few days had a noble sadness in them. She was to lose Miss Mole but could not grudge her to the exalted state of being housekeeper to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Corder, and Miss Mole knew she would be welcome at any time if she liked to drop in for a cup of tea. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Gibson gazed admiringly at this woman who had appeared out of nowhere to save <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ridding’s life, to keep out the policeman and avert an inquest and who betrayed no nervousness at the prospect of living with a minister, a man whose jokes, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Gibson recognised, were comparable to passing froth on a pool of unknown depth.</p>
			<p>Hannah’s own sadness was shot with a sense of adventure. She was prepared for every kind of dullness and annoyance, she was prepared to be sent adrift again on a world that did not want her, but her belief in approaching good was irrepressible: there was the man next door with his cats and his parrot and his canary and, for all she knew, he might be the one who was to leave her a fortune; there would be the fun of watching Lilla’s secret anxiety and careful condescension, and she was in the place she loved with the chance, if she behaved herself, of finding primroses on the other side of the river, in the spring.</p>
			<p>Yet she wished she could have had a little longer with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Gibson, for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ridding was still unfriendly and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Blenkinsop was still the fortified place she had left behind her. She understood the nature of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ridding’s defences and respected them, but she itched to tease <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Blenkinsop with feints of attack. In daily expectation of another ultimatum, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Gibson was treating him as though he were seriously ill: she whispered if she encountered Hannah on the landing outside his rooms, took special pains with the cooking of his food and carried it to him herself lest the blundering of the little servant should distress him, and this both angered Hannah and gave her the opportunity she wanted.</p>
			<p>On her last evening, she went into the kitchen and picked up the tray.</p>
			<p>“He won’t like it!” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Gibson gasped.</p>
			<p>“He’ll have to lump it,” Hannah said vulgarly. “What about your poor legs, as you call them?”</p>
			<p>There were no limits to Miss Mole’s audacity: <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Gibson could not cope with it and she looked at Hannah with the mournful, helpless interest she had once experienced when she saw a man go into a cage of lions.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Blenkinsop was sitting by the fire in a large sitting-room heavily furnished with his mother’s mahogany. In front of him was a chessboard on a stool and his hand was poised above one of the pieces. He did not look up and Hannah felt as if she had carelessly entered a church while a service was in progress. The proper thing was to slip away and trust the appetising smell of cooked meats to creep through <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Blenkinsop’s absorption, but, instead of doing that, she said crisply, “Dinner is served, sir!” and taking a step forward, she added, “So that’s what you do in the evenings! It must be a great resource.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Blenkinsop looked astonished and then frowned. “It needs concentration,” he said pointedly.</p>
			<p>“That’s what I mean,” Hannah replied obtusely. “I’ve brought up your dinner because <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Gibson’s legs ache.”</p>
			<p>“There’s no reason why <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Gibson should do it.”</p>
			<p>“Fear,” said Hannah, “is one of the strongest human emotions.”</p>
			<p>“I’m afraid I don’t follow you,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Blenkinsop said with marked politeness.</p>
			<p>“The poor dear is afraid of losing you.”</p>
			<p>“She knows how to keep me.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Blenkinsop took his seat at the table and unfolded his napkin. “And really,” he went on, indignation mastering courtesy, “I don’t quite understand why you should interest yourself in the question.”</p>
			<p>“No, you don’t understand,” Hannah said gently. “And I make no apology. I’m speaking, as it were, from my deathbed. <i>Moriturus te saluto!</i> Tomorrow, you’ll be glad to know, I’m moving on. I’m going to live with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Corder⁠—as his housekeeper⁠—oh Lord!” A faint gleam of interest passed across <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Blenkinsop’s face and she took advantage of it. “Yes, think of that!” she cried, “I’d rather live with the Riddings. Why don’t you teach <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ridding to play chess? That would keep him out of the oven! And what an inconvenience for you to find new lodgings! And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Gibson’s heart will break! Stay where you are, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Blenkinsop, and think of me tomorrow at this time, when you’re here in your comfortable room and I’m in a strange land. But perhaps I shall see you sometimes at the chapel. That will cheer me up.”</p>
			<p>“Not very likely,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Blenkinsop said, firmly nipping this bud of hope, and he applied himself to his dinner with an unmistakable air of dismissal.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
